---
title: "A fast asynchronous MCMC sampler for sparse Bayesian inference"
authors: "Yves Atchadé, Liwei Wang"
year: 2021
source: arxiv
source_id: "2108.06446"
url: "http://arxiv.org/abs/2108.06446v1"
domain: scientific-computing
---
arXiv:2108.06446v1  [stat.CO]  14 Aug 2021
A FAST ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLER FOR SPARSE
BAYESIAN INFERENCE
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
(May 2021)
Abstract. We propose a very fast approximate Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
sampling framework that is applicable to a large class of sparse Bayesian inference
problems, where the computational cost per iteration in several models is of order
O(ns), where n is the sample size, and s the underlying sparsity of the model.
This cost can be further reduced by data sub-sampling when stochastic gradient
Langevin dynamics are employed. The algorithm is an extension of the asynchro-
nous Gibbs sampler of [31], but can be viewed from a statistical perspective as
a form of Bayesian iterated sure independent screening ([23]). We show that in
high-dimensional linear regression problems, the Markov chain generated by the
proposed algorithm admits an invariant distribution that recovers correctly the
main signal with high probability under some statistical assumptions. Furthermore
we show that its mixing time is at most linear in the number of regressors. We
illustrate the algorithm with several models.
1. Introduction
There is a rich and extensive literature on high-dimensional sparse Bayesian in-
ference built mainly around shrinkage priors and spike and slab priors (see e.g.
[43, 27, 15, 14, 4, 13, 45, 8] and the references therein).
However the computa-
tional cost per iteration for sampling from the resulting posterior distributions grows
at least as O(n2p) in Gaussian linear regression models with n data samples and p
regressors (n ≥p), and becomes quickly prohibitive, particularly in non-Gaussian
models. Indeed, computing high-dimensional integrals remains the main challenge
in the practical implementation of Bayesian inference. The problem has grown much
2010 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. 62F15, 62Jxx.
Key words and phrases. Sparse Bayesian inference, Asynchronous MCMC sampling, MCMC mix-
ing, Bayesian deep learning.
This work is partially supported by the NSF grant DMS 1513040.
Y. Atchad´e: Boston University, 111 Cummington Mall, Boston 02215 MA, United States. E-mail
address: yvesa@umich.edu.
L. Wang: Boston University, 111 Cummington Mall, Boston 02215 MA, United States. E-mail
address: wlwfoo@bu.edu.
1

2
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
worse over the last decade or so with the rise of deep neural networks and other highly
over-parameterized models ([7]).
As a step forward, we propose herein a very fast but approximate MCMC scheme
for sparse Bayesian models with spike and slab priors. The algorithm builds on a
version of the spike and slab prior developed in [3], and closely related to the pseudo-
prior device of [12]. The proposed prior introduces a variable δ ∈∆def
= {0, 1}p (called
sparsity structure), with prior distribution {π(δ), δ ∈∆} of the form
π(δ) ∝p−u∥δ∥0,
(1)
for some user-deﬁned parameter u > 1. Given δ the components of θ are assumed
to be conditionally independent mean-zero Gaussian random variables, with variance
ρ−1
0
(resp. ρ−1
1 ) if the corresponding component of δ is 0 (resp. 1), for user-deﬁned
parameters ρ0 and ρ1. The limiting case ρ−1
0
= 0 corresponds to the well-known spike
and slab prior with a point mass at 0 ([43]). This type of spike and slab priors goes
back at least to ([27]). Given (δ, θ) the conditional distribution of the data is then
assumed to be D ∼fθδ, where θδ
def
= θ · δ is the component-wise product of θ, δ, and
fθ(·) is a density on the data sample space. Setting ℓ(θ) def
= log fθ(D), the resulting
posterior distribution of (δ, θ) given D has density on ∆× Rp given by
Π(δ, θ|D) ∝
 1
pu
rρ1
ρ0
∥δ∥0
exp

−ρ0
2 ∥θ −θδ∥2
2 −ρ1
2 ∥θδ∥2
2 + ℓ(θδ)

.
(2)
Note that, because the two alternative prior densities N(0, ρ−1
0 ) and N(0, ρ−1
1 ) have
densities with respect to the Lebesgue measure, (2) does not possess the well-known
trans-dimensionality issue that pose problems with spike and slab priors with points
mass at the origin. Furhermore, because the components of θ are independent under
the prior and the likelihood function depends on θ through θδ, the marginal posterior
distribution of (δ, θδ) under (2) does not depend on ρ0, and in particular is the same
as with the corresponding spike and slab prior with point mass at the origin. Hence
(2) incurs no loss of information in the estimation of (δ, θδ) compared with spike and
slab priors with point mass at the origin (we refer the reader to [3] for more details).
1.1. Main contributions. We propose a fast MCMC method to sample approx-
imately from (2) where the computational cost per iteration in generalized linear
models is of order O(ns), where n is the sample size, and s the underlying sparsity
of the model.
This cost can be further reduced by sub-sampling when stochastic
gradient Langevin dynamics ([54]) is employed. Furthermore, we show that for linear
regression models the mixing time of the algorithm is O(p), provided a large enough

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
3
sample size is available. The algorithm can be viewed as a form of Bayesian sure in-
dependent screening ([22, 23]) in the sense that, as in sure independent screening, the
algorithm alternates between a fast component-wise variable screening step where the
components of δ are sampled independently (conditionally on θ), and a sparse model
reﬁt step where the parameter θ is re-estimated. From the MCMC viewpoint, the
proposed algorithm is an extension of the asynchronous Gibbs sampler ([50, 31, 19])
where several variables are updated asynchronously and in parallel.
We test the algorithm empirically on linear and logistic regression models, and with
a deep neural network model (lenet-5 applied to the MNIST-FASHION ([56]) dataset).
The application to logistic regression models show that the algorithm is an order of
magnitude faster than the mean-ﬁeld variational approximation of (2). In deep neural
network models the proposed algorithm combined with stochastic gradient Langevin
dynamics can be easily implemented by modifying existing stochastic gradient descent
implementation.
1.2. Related work. Sparse model estimation has been a major theme in statistics
over the last two decades ([11, 29, 52]), driven in large part by biomedical and engi-
neering applications. In deep learning, despite the double descent paradox and the
common practice of ﬁtting highly overparametrized models, there is also a growing
interest in sparse modeling ([55, 38, 6, 26, 34, 20, 24]).
Most existing Bayesian implementation of large scale sparse models typically relies
on variational approximation of the posterior distribution, and tremendous progress
has been made on the topic over the last few years ([37, 28, 53, 51, 16, 57, 60]).
However variational approximation is a general methodology, not a speciﬁc algorithm.
And the extra step of building a good variational approximation family for a given
problem – an important requirement for the consistency of the method ([60]) – is not a
one-size-ﬁts-all process. Furthermore, ﬁtting variational approximation families that
are not conjugate is generally a costly nonconvex problem. For instance, we observed
on logistic regression models that the mean ﬁeld variational approximation of (2) is
computationally more expensive than the algorithm proposed in this work.
1.3. Outline. The paper is organized as follows. We end the introduction with a
compendium of our notations. The asynchronous sampler is developed in Section 2.
Some theoretical insights are provided in Section 3, but to keep the focus on the main
ideas we placed the proofs in the appendix. The numerical illustrations are collected
in Section 4. The paper ends with some concluding remarks in Section 5. MATLAB
code for the logistic regression and deep neural network examples are available at
https://github.com/odrinaryliwei/S-SGLD.

4
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
1.4. Notations. We introduce here some Markov chain notations that are used be-
low, largely following [42]. A Markov kernel P on some measurable space (T, B) acts
both on bounded measurable functions f on T and on σ-ﬁnite measures µ on (T, B) via
Pf(·) def
=
R
P(·, dy)f(y) and µP(·) def
=
R
µ(dx)P(x, ·) respectively. If W : T →[1, +∞)
is a function, the W-norm of a function f : T →R is deﬁned as |f|W
def
= supT |f|/W.
When W = 1, this is the supremum norm. If µ is a signed measure on (T, B), the to-
tal variation norm ∥µ∥tv is deﬁned as ∥µ∥tv
def
= 1
2 sup{f,|f|1≤1} |µ(f)|, and the W-norm
of µ is deﬁned as ∥µ∥W
def
=
1
2 sup{g,|g|W ≤1} |µ(g)|, where µ(f) denotes the integral
R
T f(x)µ(dx). Given two Markov kernels P, Q on (T, B), their product is the Markov
kernel deﬁned as PQ(x, A) def
=
R
P(x, dy)Q(y, A). In particular we deﬁne P n, the n-th
power of P, as P 0(x, A) def
= δx(A) and P n+1 = PP n, n ≥0, where δx(dt) stands for
the Dirac mass at x. Note that µ(PQ) = (µP)Q, and (µP)(f) = µ(Pf).
We also collect here our notations on sparse models. Throughout our parameter
space is Rp equipped with its Euclidean norm ∥·∥2 and inner product ⟨·, ·⟩. We also use
∥·∥0 which counts the number of non-zero elements, and ∥·∥∞which returns the largest
absolute value. We set ∆def
= {0, 1}p. Elements of ∆are called sparsity structures.
For δ, δ′ ∈∆, we write δ ⊆δ′ if δj ≤δ′
j for all 1 ≤j ≤p, and we write δ ⊇δ′ if
δ′ ⊆δ. Given δ ∈∆, and θ ∈Rp, we write θδ to denote the component-wise product
of θ and δ, and δc def
= 1 −δ. We will also write [θ]δ = (θj, j ∈{1 ≤k ≤p : δk = 1})
which collect the components of θ with corresponding components of δ equal to 1.
Conversely, assuming ∥δ∥0 > 0, and for u ∈R∥δ∥0, we deﬁne (u, 0)δ as the element of
Rp such that [(u, 0)δ]δ = u.
2. The asynchronous sampler
Probability distributions of the form (2) are commonly handled using Metropolis-
Hastings within Gibbs ([47, 10]). As a start we follow the same approach, and derive
an asymptotically exact algorithm that alternates between an update of δ given θ,
and an update of θ given δ. To update θ given δ, we utilize the fact that given δ
the selected components (denoted [θ]δ) and the non-selected components (denoted
[θ]δc) of θ are conditionally independent, and that the components of [θ]δc are i.i.d.
N(0, ρ−1
0 ). Assuming ∥δ∥0 > 0, it is clear from (2) that the conditional distribution
of [θ]δ given δ has density on R∥δ∥0 proportional to
u 7→exp

−ρ1
2 ∥u∥2
2 + ℓ((u, 0)δ)

.
(3)
We then naturally update [θ]δ using a Markov kernel on R∥δ∥with invariant distri-
bution proportional to (3) that we denote Pδ. Any convenient MCMC algorithm can
be used here (Random Walk Metropolis, Metropolis adjusted Langevin, Hamiltonian

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
5
Monte Carlo, or others), and one can leverage the sparsity of δ for a fast computation
of ℓ((u, 0)δ).
We use a Gibbs sampler to update δ given θ.
It comes out from (2) that the
conditional distribution of δj given θ, δ−j is the Bernoulli distribution Ber(qj(δ, θ)),
with probability of success given by
qj(δ, θ) def
=

1 + exp

a + 1
2(ρ1 −ρ0)θ2
j + ℓ(θδ(j,0)) −ℓ(θδ(j,1))
−1
,
(4)
where a def
= u log(p)+ 1
2 log(ρ0/ρ1), and where δ(j,0) (resp δ(j,1)) is the same as δ except
possibly at component j where δ(j,0)
j
= 0 (resp. δ(j,1)
j
= 1). Naturally, qj(δ, θ) does not
depend on δj. We update J randomly selected components of δ at each iteration. Put
together these two steps form an asymptotically exact MCMC algorithm to sample
from (2) that is our ideal sampler.
Algorithm 1. [Asymptotically Exact Sampler]
Draw (δ(0), θ(0)) from some initial distribution, and repeat the following steps for
k = 0, . . .. Given (δ(k), θ(k)) = (δ, θ) ∈∆× Rp:
(STEP 1): For all j such that δj = 0, draw independently ¯θj ∼N(0, ρ−1
0 ).
Provided that ∥δ∥0 > 0, draw [¯θ]δ ∼Pδ([θ]δ, ·), where Pδ is a Markov kernel
on R∥δ∥0 with invariant density proportional to (3).
(STEP 2): Set ¯δ = δ. Randomly select a subset J ⊂{1, . . . , p} of size J.
• For each j ∈J: draw Vj ∼Ber(qj(¯δ, ¯θ)), where qj is as in (4), and set
¯δj = Vj.
(STEP 3): Set (δ(k+1), θ(k+1)) = (¯δ, ¯θ).
Assuming that the cost of computing the likelihood function scales like O(n∥δ∥0),
and ignoring the cost of generating univariate Gaussian random variables, the com-
putation cost of the k-th iteration of Algorithm 1 is of order O(nJ∥δ(k)∥0). Clearly
that cost increases with J, but the mixing time of the resulting algorithm decreases
with J. We are not aware of any sensible way of selecting J that balances these two
costs. For easy subsequent comparisons we will follow the guideline that we set below
for selecting J in the asynchronous algorithm.
2.1. Asynchronous approximation. Algorithm 1 becomes slow in problems where
n is large and there is no eﬃcient way of computing the log-likelihood diﬀerences
ℓ(θδ(j,0)) −ℓ(θδ(j,1)) in (4). We propose to speed up this step of the algorithm by
replacing the log-likelihood diﬀerence by an approximation. To gain some intuition,
consider a linear regression problem where ℓ(θ) = −1
2∥y −Xθ∥2
2, y ∈Rn, X ∈Rn×p,

6
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
with columns normalized to ∥Xj∥2 = √n.
In that case the second order Taylor
approximation of ℓis exact, and writes
ℓ(θδ(j,0)) −ℓ(θδ(j,1)) = −θj ⟨Xj, y −Xθδ(j,0)⟩+
θ2
jn
2 .
This expression shows that the ﬁrst derivative term and the constant a in (4) are the
main determining terms. To see this, suppose that j is a relevant variable with true
regression coeﬃcient β⋆j, say. Suppose also that j is currently not selected (δj = 0).
In that case, the corresponding regression parameter θj is of order 1/√ρ0, since it
is drawn from N(0, ρ−1
0 ).
Therefore, and assuming that the regression errors are
sub-Gaussian, it can be shown that with ρ0 = n (as we advocate below),
−θj ⟨Xj, y −Xθδ(j,0)⟩≈−θjθ⋆jn = −(θj
√ρ0)
n
√ρ0
θ⋆j ≈±|θ⋆j|√n,
whereas the second order term is O(n/ρ0) = O(1). Hence, provided that the cur-
rent estimate θj has the correct sign (which happens with probability 1/2), the ﬁrst
derivative dominates and ℓ(θδ(j,0)) −ℓ(θδ(j,1)) is negatively large, and qj(δ, θ) is close
to 1. Note however that if the variable j is irrelevant, then the ﬁrst order term is
O(
p
log(p)), whereas the second order term remains O(1).
In that case the term
a def
= u log(p) + 1
2 log(ρ0/ρ1) from the prior dominates and qj(δ, θ) is close to 0.
The discussion so far is essentially the idea of residual correlation well-known in
variable selection and sure screening: we ﬁt a model without a variable Xj, say, and
we consider adding Xj to the model if its correlation with the residual is high. We
extend this idea to the general model as follow by using the approximation:
ℓ(θδ(j,0)) −ℓ(θδ(j,1)) ≈−θj
∂ℓ
∂θj
(θδ(j,0)) −
θ2
j
2
 ∂ℓ
∂θj
(θδ(j,0))
2
,
where we revert the sign of the quadratic term for increased sensitivity. This leads to
the following approximation of qj(δ, θ) in (4) :
˜qj(δ, θ) def
=

1 + exp

a + 1
2(ρ1 −ρ0)θ2
j −θjGj(θδ) −
θ2
j
2 Gj(θδ)2
!!−1
,
where
Gj(·) def
= ∂ℓ
∂θj
(·).
(5)
Suppose now that we randomly select a subset J of {1, . . . , p} as in (STEP 2) of
Algorithm 1, and we need to approximate the J terms qj(δ, ¯θ). In keeping with the
idea of residual correlation explained above, we approximate qj(δ, ¯θ) by ˜qj(ϑ, ¯θ), where

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
7
ϑ = ϑ(J, δ) ∈{0, 1}p with k-th component deﬁned as
ϑk =
(
δk
if
k /∈J
0
otherwise .
(6)
For additional ﬂexibility we allow to use an approximation ˜Pδ of the kernel Pδ
in (STEP 2) of Algorithm 1, and we do not require ˜Pδ to have (3) as invariant
distribution. The full algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 2.
Note that, because ϑ does not depend on (δj)j∈J, the variables (Vj)j∈J in (STEP
2) of Algorithm 2 are now conditional independent Bernoulli random variables, and
can be sampled in parallel (instead of sequentially as in Algorithm 1). Furthermore,
the computation of the J probabilities ˜qj(ϑ, ¯θ) requires the calculation of only one
gradient G(θϑ).
Algorithm 2. [Asynchronous sampler]
Draw (δ(0), θ(0)) from some initial distribution, and repeat the following steps for
k = 0, . . .. Given (δ(k), θ(k)) = (δ, θ) ∈∆× Rp:
(STEP 1): For all j such that δj = 0, draw independently ¯θj ∼N(0, ρ−1
0 ).
Provided that ∥δ∥0 > 0, draw [¯θ]δ ∼˜Pδ([θ]δ, ·), where ˜Pδ is a Markov kernel
on R∥δ∥.
(STEP 2): Set ¯δ = δ. Randomly select a subset J ⊂{1, . . . , p} of size J. Form
the vector ϑ = ϑ(J, δ) as in (6).
• For each j ∈J, draw independently Vj ∼Ber(˜qj(ϑ, ¯θ)), where ˜qj(ϑ, ¯θ) is
as in (5), and set ¯δj = Vj.
(STEP 3): Set (δ(k+1), θ(k+1)) = (¯δ, ¯θ).
Assuming again a likelihood function cost of O(n∥δ∥0), and ignoring the cost of
generating univariate Gaussian random variables, the computation cost of the k-th
iteration of Algorithm 2 is now of order O(n∥δ(k)∥0 + J), which can be substantially
better than O(nJ∥δ(k)∥0) achieved by Algorithm 1, depending on J. Here it is clearly
advantageous to take J large, as close to n∥δ(k)∥0 as possible. However there is a third
new dimension to consider here: as J increases, the limiting distribution of Algorithm
2 (assuming it exists) diverges further away from Π(·|D), due to the accumulation of
errors in the asynchronous sampling. We argue below that a sensible choice is setting
J = 100, or J = αn, for some small fraction α (α ∈[0.01, 0.1]).
Algorithm 2 has several interesting connections.
From a statistical perspective
the algorithm can be viewed as a Bayesian analog of the iterated sure independent
screening (ISIS) of ([22, 23]). Sure independent screening is a statistical inference algo-
rithm that alternates between a fast component-wise variable screening step (based on

8
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
marginal correlation thresholding, or marginal maximum likelihood estimate thresh-
olding), and a model reﬁt step.
Algorithm 2 has the same structure: (STEP 2)
corresponds to the variable screening step – which boils down to residual correlation
in the linear regression case – followed by a reﬁt step based on MCMC draws. Unlike
SIS that relies on hard-thresholding, the variable screening step of Algorithm 2 uses
the prior distribution to control sparsity.
Viewed through the lense of MCMC methods, Algorithm 2 appears as an approx-
imate version of Algorithm 1 where the update of δ in (STEP 2) is replaced by (an
inexact form of) the asynchronous Gibbs sampler aka Hogwild! ([50, 31]), recently
analyzed by [19, 17]. Indeed, we note that in (STEP 2) of algorithm 2 the newly
simulated variable (¯δji)i are conditionally independent and the update of ¯δji is based
on ϑ, a variable that remains unchanged through the sweep.
2.2. Further extension using stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics. Most
statistical problems require a full pass through the dataset to evaluate the likelihood
function and its derivatives. Therefore in big data problems the cost of computing the
likelihood and its gradient in Algorithm 2 may become a computational bottleneck.
Stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD) algorithms have recently emerged as
very useful algorithms for big data problems where only a subset of the data is used
to approximate the likelihood at each iteration ([54, 1, 40, 35, 21, 5]). To be more
speciﬁc, we suppose here that the log-likelihood function has the form
ℓ(θ) def
=
n
X
i=1
ℓi(θ),
θ ∈Rp.
In that case, provided that the log-likelihood functions has a Lipschitz gradients, one
can naturally take ˜Pδ in (STEP 1) of Algorithm 2 as a SGLD kernel. The resulting
algorithm is presented in Algorithm 3.
Note that one can also approximate the
Bernoulli probability ˜qj in (5) using the selected mini-batch. For that purpose, and
given a mini-batch I ⊂{1, . . . , n} of size B, 1 ≤j ≤p, and (δ, θ) ∈∆× Rp, we set
ˆqj(δ, θ) def
=

1 + exp

a + 1
2(ρ1 −ρ0)θ2
j −θj ˆGj(θδ) −
θ2
j
2
ˆGj(θδ)2
!!−1
,
where
ˆGj(·) = n
B
∂
∂θj
"X
i∈I
ℓi
#
(·).
(7)
For numerical implementation it is important to notice that in (STEP 2) all the
probability ˆqj(ϑ, ¯θ) are computed based on the same gradient estimate ˆG(¯θϑ), that is
computed only once.

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
9
Using the same cost computing assumption as above, and ignoring the cost of
generating univariate Gaussian random variables, we see that the computation cost of
the k-th iteration of Algorithm 3 is now of order O(B∥δ(k)∥0+J). However, Algorithm
3 now has a higher approximation error. Our numerical experiments suggest that
this higher approximation error does not impact mixing, but rather the quality of the
limiting distribution.
Algorithm 3. [Asynchronous sparse SGLD]
Draw (δ(0), θ(0)) from some initial distribution, and repeat the following steps for
k = 0, . . .. Given (δ(k), θ(k)) = (δ, θ) ∈∆× Rp:
(STEP 1): For all j such that δj = 0, draw independently ¯θj ∼N(0, ρ−1
0 ).
Provided that ∥δ∥0 > 0, randomly select a data mini-batch I ⊂{1, . . . , n} of
size B, draw Z ∼N(0, I∥δ∥0), and set
[¯θ]δ = [θ]δ + γ

−ρ1[θ]δ + n
B
X
i∈I
∇ℓi(θδ)
!
+
p
2γZ,
(8)
where γ > 0 is the step-size.
(STEP 2): Set ¯δ = δ. Randomly select a subset J ⊂{1, . . . , p} of size J. Form
the vector ϑ = ϑ(J, δ) as in (6).
• For each j ∈J, draw independently ¯δj ∼Ber(ˆqj(ϑ, ¯θ)), where ˆqj is as in
(7).
(STEP 3): Set (δ(k+1), θ(k+1)) = (¯δ, ¯θ).
3. Approximate correctness
In this section the dataset D is assumed ﬁxed, and we shall omit the dependence
of the Markov kernels on D. Let K (resp. ˜K) be the transition kernel of the Markov
chain generated by Algorithm 1 (resp. Algorithm 2). We ﬁrst write the expression
of K and ˜K and introduce some useful notations in the process. Given θ ∈Rp, and
j ∈{1, . . . , p}, let Qθ,j be the Markov kernel on ∆which, given δ ∈∆, leaves δi
unchanged for all i̸ = j, and update δj using a draw from Ber(qj(δ, θ)):
Qθ,j(δ, δ′) = qj(δ, θ)δ′
j(1 −qj(δ, θ))1−δ′
j Y
i̸=j
1{δi=δ′
i}, δ, δ′ ∈∆.
Given J = {j1, . . . , jJ} ⊆{1, . . . , p}, we multiply the Markov kernels Qθ,ji together to
form Qθ,J:
Qθ,J
def
= Qθ,j1 × · · · × Qθ,jJ,

10
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
where the Markov kernel multiplication is as deﬁned in Section 1.4. Let ˜Qθ,J be the
Markov kernel on ∆given by
˜Qθ,J(δ, δ′) def
=
Y
j /∈J
1{δ′
j=δj}
J
Y
i=1
˜qji(ϑ, θ)δ′
ji(1 −˜qji(ϑ, θ))1−δ′
ji , δ, δ′ ∈∆,
where ϑ = ϑ(J, δ) is as deﬁned in (6). The Markov kernel K of algorithm 1 can then
be written as
K((δ, θ); (dδ′, dθ′)) = Kδ(θ, dθ′)
X
J: |J|=J
p
J
−1
Qθ′,J(δ, dδ′),
where Kδ denotes the transition kernel of (STEP 1), which can be written as
Kδ(θ, dθ′) def
= Pδ([θ]δ, d[θ′]δ)
Y
j: δj=0
N(0, ρ−1
0 )(dθ′
j),
where N(µ, σ2)(dx) denotes the probability measure of the Gaussian distribution
N(µ, σ2) on R. The Markov kernel ˜K has the same structure, but with Pδ replaced
by ˜Pδ and Qθ,J replaced by ˜Qθ,J.
Hence the diﬀerence between Algorithm 1 and
Algorithm 2 is driven by the diﬀerence between Pδ and ˜Pδ (STEP 1), and the diﬀerence
between Qθ,J and ˜Qθ,J (STEP 2). By construction, the invariant distribution of K
is Π(·|D). We show next that under some additional assumptions ˜K possesses an
invariant distribution that we denote ˜Π(·|D). We make the assumption that for each
ﬁxed model δ, the kernel ˜Pδ used in (STEP 1) satisﬁes a geometric drift condition.
More speciﬁcally, we make the following assumption.
H1. For each 1 ≤j ≤p there exists Vj : R →[1, ∞), such that maxj
R
Vj(x)e−ρ−1
0
x2/2dx <
∞, and the following holds. For each δ ∈∆, with ∥δ∥0 > 0, there exist λδ ∈(0, 1),
bδ < ∞such that
˜PδVδ(u) ≤λδVδ(u) + bδ, u ∈R∥δ∥0,
where Vδ(u) def
= V (δ, (u, 0)δ), and V (δ, θ) def
= Pp
j=1 δjVj(θj).
The next result follows easily from H1.
Proposition 1. Assume H1, and suppose that ˜K is phi-irreducible and aperiodic,
and for all b < ∞, the set {(δ, θ) ∈∆× Rp : V (δ, θ) ≤b} is a petite set for ˜K. Then
˜K possesses a unique invariant distribution ˜Π, and there exist ˜λ ∈(0, 1), a constant
C0 such that for all (δ, θ) ∈∆× Rp, and all k ≥0,
∥˜Kk((δ, θ), ·) −˜Π∥tv ≤C0˜λkV 1/2(δ, θ).
(9)
Proof. See Section A.
□

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
11
We compare next the stationary distribution ˜Π(·|D) of Algorithm 2 to the poste-
rior distribution Π(·|D) in (2). Since the invariant distributions Π(·|D) and ˜Π(·|D)
are eigen-measures of their corresponding Markov operators, comparing ˜Π(·|D) and
Π(·|D) is a form of Davis-Kahan theorem ([18]). As such we expect an upper bound
on ˜Π(·|D) −Π(·|D) to involve the inverse of the spectral gap of K or ˜K, and a com-
parison of the kernels K and ˜K. Several such results have been derived recently in
the literature ([46, 49, 30]), and the references therein. To the exception of ([46])
most of these results uses a strategy that compares K((δ, θ), ·) and ˜K((δ, θ), ·) for
all (δ, θ), yielding bounds that cannot leverage Bayesian posterior contraction. We
develop a more suitable bound that involves comparing K((δ, θ), ·) and ˜K((δ, θ), ·)
only for (δ, θ) ∈B, for some set B such that Π(B|D) ≈1. Our approach is similar to,
but diﬀers in the details from ([46]). We shall make the assumption that
H2. There exist ∆0 ⊆∆, measurable sets Bδ ⊆Rp for each δ ∈∆0, and
B ⊆
[
δ∈∆0
{δ} × Bδ,
such that Π(Bc|D) is small, where Bc denotes the complement of B. Furthermore,
sup
(δ,θ)∈B
h
V (δ, θ) + KV (δ, θ) + ˜KV (δ, θ)
i
< ∞.
(10)
Given the sets in H2, we deﬁne
η1
def
=
sup
(δ,θ)∈B
∥Pδ([θ]δ, ·) −˜Pδ([θ]δ, ·)∥tv,
(11)
η2
def
=
sup
(δ,θ)∈B

Z
˜Kδ(θ, dθ′)
X
J: |J|=J
p
J
−1
Qθ′,J(δ, ·) −˜Qθ′,J(δ, ·)


tv
.
(12)
Theorem 2. Suppose that H1 and H2 hold, and Π(V |D) < ∞. Then ˜K possesses a
unique invariant distribution ˜Π, and there exists a ﬁnite constant C0 such that
∥˜Π(·|D) −Π(·|D)∥tv ≤
C0
1 −˜λ

Π(Bc|D)1/2 + η1/2
1
+ η1/2
2

,
(13)
where ˜λ is as in Proposition 1.
Proof. See Section B.
□
Remark 3. Theorem 2 quantiﬁes the observation that Algorithm 2 behaves like Al-
gorithm 1 if the Markov kernels ˜Pδ and ˜Qθ,J are close to Pδ and Qθ,J respectively.
The result can leverage posterior contraction properties of Π for a more reﬁned com-
parison. However the dependence of the bound on the spectral gap 1 −˜λ is a major
roadblock for applying Theorem 2. Indeed, even in the relatively simple setting of

12
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
linear regression models, the ways in which the spectral gap 1 −˜λ of ˜K depends on n
and p is diﬃcult to establish. This prevents up from fully characterizing the proximity
between ˜Π(·|D) and Π(·|D) in terms of n, p, and other primitives of the problem.
3.1. Approximate correctness for linear regression models. In this section we
take a closer look at Algorithm 2 in the case of linear regression models. For reasons
explained in Remark 3 we will not rely on Theorem 2. Instead we analyze directly
the marginal chain {δ(k), k ≥0} produced by Algorithm 2, building on a coupling
argument originally developed by [19].
Given some random response Y ∈Rn, and a nonrandom design matrix X ∈Rn×p,
we consider in this section a log-likelihood function given by
ℓ(θ) = −1
2σ2 ∥Y −Xθ∥2
2, θ ∈Rp,
(14)
for a known constant σ2. We write Xj to denote the j-th column of X, and Xδ to
denote the sub-matrix of X comprised of the columns of X for which δj = 1. Without
any loss of generality we assume throughout that
∥Xj∥2 = √n.
(15)
In the linear regression considered here, the conditional distribution of θ given δ has a
closed-form Gaussian distribution. We can thus assume that (STEP 1) of Algorithm
2 is performed by taking a draw directly from the conditional distribution of θ given
δ. In this case H1 and the assumption of Proposition hold with Vj ≡1, λδ = 0, bδ = 1.
Hence without any additional assumption we can apply Proposition 1 and conclude
that Algorithm 2 admits an invariant distribution ˜Π(·|D). To compare Π(·|D) and
˜Π(·|D) we make the following assumption.
H3.
(1) There exists an absolute constant c0 < ∞such that
max
j̸=k |⟨Xj, Xk⟩| ≤
p
c0n log(p).
(16)
(2) There exist a parameter value θ⋆∈Rp (with sparsity support denoted δ⋆, and
ℓ0 norm s⋆
def
= ∥δ⋆∥0), such that
E⋆[Y −Xθ⋆] = 0,
P⋆[|⟨u, Y −Xθ⋆⟩| > σt] ≤c1e
−
t2
2∥u∥2
2 ,
(17)
for all u ∈Rn, t ∈R, and some absolute constant c1.
(3) As n, p →∞, the ratios ∥θ⋆∥∞/ log(p) and n/p remain bounded from above
by some absolute constant c2.
In what follows we write P and E to denote the probability measure and expectation
operator of the Markov chains deﬁned by the algorithms, and we write P⋆and E⋆

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
13
for the probability measure and expectation operator related to the data generating
distribution as assumed in H3.
Remark 4. Assumption H3-(2) assumes that the regression errors are sub-Gaussian.
(2)-(3) are mild assumptions. Assumption H3-(1) is also a standard assumption is
sparse signal recovery and assumes that the correlation between any two distinct
columns of X is of order
p
log(p)/n.
We set
θ⋆
def
=
min
j: δ⋆j=1 |θ⋆j|.
Theorem 5. Consider the linear regression model presented above and assume H3.
Suppose that
ρ1 = 1,
and
ρ0 = n
σ2 .
Let P denote the distribution of the Markov chain {δ(k), k ≥0} generated by Algo-
rithm 2, and started from the null model (∥δ(0)∥0 = 0). There exists some constant
C1, C2, C3 that depends only on σ2, ∥θ⋆∥∞, c0, c1, and c2, such that for for all n, p ≥2,
if
n ≥C1 max
θ−2
⋆(1 + s3
⋆) log(p), θ−2
⋆J2 log(p), (log(p))3
,
and
u ≥C2(1 + s⋆)2,
(18)
it holds for all k ≥1,
E⋆

max
j: δ⋆j=1
P(δ(k)
j
= 1) −Π(δj = 1|D)


≤

1 −3
10
J
p
k
+ 10

e−C3θ⋆
√n + 1
p

.
(19)
Proof. See Section C.
□
The theorem shows that in linear regression models the limiting distribution of
Algorithm 2 recovers correctly the relevant components of the signal. The bound in
(19) can be interpreted as a mixing time bound for the Markov chain {δ(k), k ≥0},
where convergence to stationarity is measured using total variation distance on the
relevant one-dimensional marginal distributions. Importantly, the result shows that
the convergence rate is at most linear in p/J. However, the ﬁrst part of (18) shows
that J cannot be taken too large. The theorem also shows that the correct scaling for
the prior parameter ρ0 in order to achieve a good mixing is ρ0 ∝n. We recall that
the statistical performance of the posterior does not depend on ρ0.

14
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
The ﬁrst part of (18) imposes some minimum sample size requirement. We noted
empirically that the mixing time of Algorithm 2 degrades when n is too small com-
pared to p, particularly in logistic regression models. This suggests that (18) repre-
sents some genuine information limit of the problem. In limited data settings where
(18) may not hold, we recommend combining Algorithm 2 with simulated tempering
or related methods for improved mixing. However in the interest of space, we do not
pursue these tempering ideas here.
The dependence of (18) on θ⋆is the so-called β-min condition that is commonly
needed for correct model selection (see [41] for discussion). This condition has also
appeared elsewhere in the analysis of high-dimensional MCMC samplers ([58, 2]). The
condition on u in (18) is admittedly very hard to check since s⋆is not known. We
found in practice that for linear and logistic regression models the algorithm performs
well when u is simply taken in the range u ∈(1, 2].
With the same proof strategy, we believe that Theorem 5 can be extended to sta-
tistical models that possess the restricted strong concavity property ([44]), under the
additional assumption that one can sample exactly from the conditional distribution
of θ given δ. We did not pursue this because of the limited applicability: the exact
sampling assumption is highly unrealistic for non-Gaussian models. Extending The-
orem 5 to cases where a Markov kernel is used in (STEP 1) seems more challenging,
but is likely to still hold if the Markov kernel has a strong drift toward the level sets
of the target distribution. We leave this for potential future research.
4. Numerical illustration
4.1. Linear regression. To illustrate Theorem 5 we estimate empirically the mixing
time of Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 using the coupling methodology of [9], for
increasing values of p. We refer the reader to Appendix D for a brief description of
the estimation method and the coupled chain used. Here is the simulation set up. We
generate X ∈Rn×p with independent rows drawn from Np(0, Σ), where Σij =̺
|j−i|,
where̺
∈{0, 0.9}. Then we draw Y ∼Nn(Xθ⋆, σIn), with σ = 1, and a sparse θ⋆
with 10 non-zero components uniformly drawn from (−7, −6) ∪(6, 7). We scale the
sample size as n = p/2. For all the results we set
ρ0 = n,
ρ1 = 1, and
u = 1.5.
We set J = 100 for both MCMC samplers. To estimate the mixing times we replicated
the coupled chains 50 times. The estimated mixing times are given on Figure 1, and
indeed shows a linear trend. The results also show that the asynchronous sampler
mixes slightly faster than Algorithm 1, as we expected, due to the quadratic boost in

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
15
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
dimension
100
200
300
400
500
600
estimated mixing time
no correlation
exact
asyn
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
dimension
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
estimated mixing time
high correlation
exact
asyn
Figure 1. Estimated mixing time for a linear regression example.
Figure on the left (resp. right) is̺
= 0 (resp.̺
= 0.9).
the approximation. We also look at the sample path of the penalized log-likelihood
¯ℓ(θ, δ|Y ′, X′) def
= −1
2σ2 ∥Y ′ −X′θδ∥2
2 −ρ1
2 ∥θδ∥2
2,
evaluated on a test dataset (Y ′, X′) (generated independently from the traning set
(Y, X) but from the same model) along the MCMC iterations.
By posterior con-
traction, we expect ¯ℓ(θ(k), δ(k)|Y ′, X′) to concentrate around ¯ℓ(θ⋆, δ⋆|Y ′, X′) as k →
∞. The speed with which ¯ℓ(θ(k), δ(k)|Y ′, X′) approaches ¯ℓ(θ⋆, δ⋆|Y ′, X′) during the
MCMC sampling is another empirical indication of mixing.
For this comparison
we run the MCMC samplers for Niter = max(2000, p −2000) number of iterations.
Figures 2 and 3 show the averages of 50 penalized log-likelihood sample paths (for
each MCMC sample we generate a new training and test datasets with the same θ⋆).
These averaged sample paths oﬀer another look into the mixing of the samplers that
is consistent with the empirical mixing times estimates.
We also compare the parameter estimates. On a given MCMC run we evaluate the
accuracy of the parameter estimation by
E def
=
1
Niter −N0
Niter
X
k=N0+1
∥θ(k) · δ(k) −θ⋆∥2
∥θ⋆∥2
,
(20)
for a burn-in N0 that we set at N0 = Niter−1000, where Niter is the number of MCMC
iterations. Figure 4 and 5 show the distributions of the relative errors E produced by
Algorithm 1 and 2 under various settings. Again, the diﬀerence between Algorithm
1 and Algorithm 2 remains small, even in the case̺
= 0.9.

16
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
0
200
400
600
800
1000
iterations
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
penalized log-likelihood
104
p = 1000
EXACT
ASYN
Target Value
0
500
1000
1500
2000
iterations
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
penalized log-likelihood
105
p = 5000
EXACT
ASYN
Target Value
Figure 2. Averaged sample paths of penalized log-likelihood values
in linear regression with̺
= 0
0
200
400
600
800
1000
iterations
-14
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
penalized log-likelihood
104
p = 1000
EXACT
ASYN
Target Value
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
iterations
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
penalized log-likelihood
105
p = 5000
EXACT
ASYN
Target Value
Figure 3. Averaged sample paths of penalized log-likelihood values
in linear regression with̺
= 0.9
Exact
Asyn
6.28
6.3
6.32
6.34
6.36
6.38
6.4
6.42
6.44
relative error
10-3
p = 1000, no correlation
Exact
Asyn
3.54
3.56
3.58
3.6
3.62
3.64
3.66
relative error
10-3
p = 5000, no correlation
Figure 4. Averaged relative error in linear regression with̺
= 0

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
17
Exact
Asyn
0.0238
0.024
0.0242
0.0244
0.0246
0.0248
relative error
p = 1000, high correlation
Exact
Asyn
0.012
0.0121
0.0122
0.0123
0.0124
0.0125
relative error
p = 5000, high correlation
Figure 5. Averaged relative error in linear regression with̺
= 0.9
4.2. Logistic regression. We also illustrate the behavior of the method on logis-
tic regression models.
We use the same data generating set up for the regressors
X ∈Rn×p and true signal θ⋆as above. And we draw the response as Yi ∼Ber(pi),
with pi =
1 + exp−⟨xi,θ⋆⟩−1, where xi denotes the i-th row of X. In this model we
cannot draw exactly from the posterior conditional distribution of θ given δ. Hence
we implemented Algorithm 1 with Pδ taken as (one iteration of) the Metropolis Ad-
justed Langevin (MaLa) algorithm ([48]), with a step-size ﬁxed to 0.01. We consider
two diﬀerent implementation of Algorithm 2. In the ﬁrst implementation we choose
˜Pδ to be the same MaLa as in Algorithm 1. Whereas in the second implementation
we choose ˜Pδ to be the stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD) kernel, with
a mini-batch of size B = 100, and a step-size ﬁxed to 0.005. We call the ﬁrst imple-
mentation the asynchronous sampler (ASYN), and we call the second implementation
the sparse asynchronous SGLD sampler (SA-SGLD). To improve mixing, particularly
when̺
= 0.9, we initialize both algorithms from the lasso estimate of θ.
To evaluate the mixing of the algorithms we look at the sample path of the penalized
log-likelihood

Y ′, X′θδ

−
log

1 + eX′θδ

1 −ρ1
2 ∥θδ∥2
2,
evaluated on a an independent test sample (Y ′, X′) (where the log and e functions
are evaluated componentwise), along the MCMC iterations, averaged over 50 data
and MCMC sampling replications. The results are reported on Figures 6-7. We see
again that both approximate samplers behaved very well.
As in the linear regression example we also compare parameter estimates. On a
given MCMC run we evaluate the accuracy of the parameter estimation using the
relative error E given in (20). Figures 8-9 show the distributions of E based on 50
MCMC replications, for p ∈{1000, 5000}, and̺
∈{0.0, 0.9}. We also use this example

18
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
iterations
-400
-350
-300
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
penalized log-likelihood
p = 1000
EXACT
ASYN
SA-SGLD
target value
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000 12000
iterations
-700
-600
-500
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
penalized log-likelihood
p = 5000
EXACT
ASYN
SA-SGLD
target value
Figure 6. Averaged sample paths of penalized log-likelihood for lo-
gistic regression, with̺
= 0
to compare the proposed algorithms with a mean ﬁeld variational approximation (VA)
of (2) using the VA family
p
Y
j=1
Ber(αj)(dδj)N(µj, v2
j )(dθj),
with parameter (αj, µj, v2
j )1≤j≤p that we estimate by minimizing the ELBO objective
function using stochastic gradient descent. We use the re-parametrization trick of
([32]). In the stochastic gradient descent we estimate the gradient by drawing small
sample of size 100 from the VA family and small mini-batch of size 100 from the
dataset. For a fair comparison we also initialize µ(0) from the same lasso estimate.
We stop the stochastic gradient descent when the maximum relative change
max

∥α(k) −α(k−1)∥2
∥α(k)∥2
, ∥µ(k) −µ(k−1)∥2
∥µ(k)∥2
, ∥v(k) −v(k−1)∥2
∥v(k)∥2
!
≤0.0025.
And we evaluate the accuracy of the produced solution by computing on the last
iteration the relative error
∥µ(k) · α(k) −θ⋆∥2
∥θ⋆∥2
.
We observe from Figures 8-9 and Table 1 that both asynchronous MCMC are more
accurate, but also faster than the mean ﬁeld VA approximation.

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
19
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
iterations
-400
-350
-300
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
penalized log-likelihood
p = 1000
EXACT
ASYN
SA-SGLD
target value
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
iterations
104
-800
-700
-600
-500
-400
-300
-200
-100
penalized log-likelihood
p = 5000
EXACT
ASYN
SA-SGLD
target value
Figure 7. Averaged sample paths of penalized log-likelihood for lo-
gistic regression with̺
= 0.9
Exact
Asyn
SA-SGLD
VA
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Relative Error
p = 1000, no correlation
Exact
Asyn
SA-SGLD
VA
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
Relative Error
p = 5000, no correlation
Figure 8. Relative error for logistic regression, with̺
= 0
Exact
Asyn
SA-SGLD
VA
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Relative Error
p = 1000, high correlation
Exact
Asyn
SA-SGLD
VA
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Relative Error
p = 5000, high correlation
Figure 9. Relative error for logistic Regression, with̺
= 0.9

20
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
p
1000
2000
5000
Exact
71.61 ± 2.80s
141.12 ± 5.12s
1232.71 ± 132.90s
Asynchronous
8.00 ± 0.74s
16.07 ± 1.64s
142.55 ± 24.05s
SA-SGLD
2.14 ± 0.24s
4.72 ± 0.39s
19.22 ± 1.27s
VA
59.92 ± 11.48s
116.05 ± 7.18s
1054.14 ± 189.68s
Table 1. Running times for Logistic Regression
4.3. Illustration with a deep neural network model. As mentioned in the intro-
duction there is a growing interest in sparse deep learning. Both in theory (as a way
to reconcile deep learning with classical statistical theory), and in the applications
(for instance in the growing area of tiny machine learning for mobile AI). Most ex-
isting approach for estimating sparse deep learning models are frequentist. Bayesian
deep learning can greatly facilitate uncertainty quantiﬁcation in model predictions.
As a proof of concept we apply Algorithm 3 for a Bayesian classiﬁcation of MNIST-
FASHION ([56]) image data using the deep neural network Lenet-5 ([33]), one of
the smallest deep neural network models. The MNIST-FASHION dataset consists of
60, 000 data points (yi, xi) (plus another 10, 000 test sample), where yi ∈{1, . . . , 10}
encodes the class of a fashion item (T-shirt, trouser, etc), and xi is a 28×28 image of
the item. The dataset is known to be more challenging than the more widely-known
handwritten digit MNIST dataset. We model the class outcome yi as independent
random variables draws from a multinomial distribution:
yi ∼M(Fθ(xi)),
i = 1, . . . , n,
with class probabilities proportional to exp(Fθ(xi)), where Fθ :
R28×28 →R10 is
a lenet-5 neural network. We actually use a slightly modiﬁed lenet-5 architecture
obtained by replacing the tanh activation function by the ReLU function, and by
enlarging the fully-connected layers. We refer the reader to Figure 10 for the archi-
tecture of the network, and to [59] for an introduction to neural network modeling.
The total number of parameter is p = 298, 650. For stability in the learned structures
we did not sparsify the convolutional layers (speciﬁcally, we keep their corresponding
δj set to 1).
For the Bayesian inference we use the hyper-parameter u = 50, ρ0 = 104, ρ1 = 1.
We apply Algorithm 3 with SGLD on the selected components of θ with a ﬁxed step-
size γ = 10−7. We set J = 550 (with stratiﬁed sampling accross the layer), and a
batch size B = 100. We initialize the sampler from the full model with all components
active, and the parameter θ initialized using the default initialization in Matlab. We
then run Algorithm 3 for Niter = 250, 000 iterations and we use the ﬁrst 150, 000 as

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
21
x
conv6 + ReLU
maxpool2
conv16 + ReLU
maxpool2
fc784×300
fc300×200
fc200×10
Fθ(x)
Figure 10. Illustration of the lenet-5 architecture.
burn-in. The running time took about 4.9 hours on a 8-core computer node with
a NVIDIA TESLA V100 GPU system with 384 GB GPU memory, using MATLAB
2021a.
During the MCMC, at each iteration k, and for each i in the test sample we
deﬁne the prediction accurary as A(k)
i
def
= 1{ˆy(k)
i
=yi}, where ˆy(k)
i
∼M(Fθ(k)·δ(k)(xi)).
We average these prediction accuracies to get ¯A(k). We also average the prediction
accuracies within each group of items to get ¯A(k)(g), g = 1, . . . , 10. To save time we
actually compute these statistics only every 100 iterations. Figure 11 plots {¯A(k), k}
and the model sparsity {∥δ(k)∥0/p, k} along the MCMC iterations, and Figure 12
shows the boxplots of the {¯A(k)(g), k} for each g. Table 2 shows the posterior sparsity
and posterior average accuracy, and includes a comparison to Monte Carlo dropout
([25]). The results shows that it is possible to signiﬁcantly compress deep learning
models with only modest loss of performance.
The computational cost (per iteration) of the algorithm is roughly twice that of
stochastic gradient descent, its frequentist counterpart. Note however that this cost
can potentially be further reduced by exploiting sparsity (as we did with linear and
logistic regression models). We did not pursue this here because MATLAB 2021a that
we used for this project does not support sparse deep learning computation.
We end with some words of caution. We are presenting this example mainly as an
exploratory exercise in the potential of the proposed framework, without much theo-
retical guarantee. In particular, due to the poor general understanding of deep neural
network models, we currently cannot say much about the properties of the limiting
distribution of Algorithm 3. Furthermore, due to the lighly multimodal nature of the
likelihood surface of deep neural network models, we cannot guarantee either that the
algorithm has mixed and is correctly sampling from its limiting distribution. More
research is needed on these issues.

22
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Prediction Accuracy
Sparsity
Figure
11. Prediction
accuracy on test sample
and sparsity along MCMC
run
Sparsity
Accuracy
SA-SGLD
1.00 (0.00)
86.5 (0.45)
MC Dropout
100
88.04 (0.02)
Table 2. Estimated poste-
rior sparsity and prediction
accuracy on test sample (in
percentage)
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
T-shirt/top
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.99
1
Trouser
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
Pullover
0.8
0.85
0.9
Dress
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Coat
0.88
0.9
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
Sandal
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Shirt
0.88
0.9
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
Sneaker
0.93
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
Bag
0.88
0.9
0.92
0.94
0.96
Ankle boot
Figure 12. Distribution of posterior predictive accuracy on MNIST-
Fashion test samples. Averaged within each class of item.
5. Some concluding remarks
We proposed in this work a fast MCMC algorithm for the Bayesian analysis of
sparse high-dimensional models. The algorithm operates as a form of Bayesian iter-
ated sure independent screening, resulting in tremendous speed. In linear regression
models we show that the algorithm mixes quickly to a limiting distribution that re-
covers correctly the main underlying signal.
In limited sample size problems the
algorithm can be advantageously combined with tempering techniques (such as simu-
lated tempering or related ideas) for better mixing properties. Such extensions could
also be particularly useful in deep learning where the resulting posterior distributions
are known to be highly multimodal. One interesting aspect of the theoretical analysis
done in this work (and that extends from [19]), is the use of a metric weaker than the

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
23
total variation metric and more directly pertinent for the statistical analysis, to mea-
sure MCMC mixing. Exploring more systematically this idea could be an important
theoretical contribution to the literature, particularly in high-dimensional problems.
Appendix A. Proof of Proposition 1
Throughout C0 denotes a generic constant whose value may change from one ap-
pearance to the next. The Markov kernel of Algorithm 2 writes
˜K((δ, θ); (dδ′, dθ′)) = ˜Kδ(θ, dθ′)
X
J: |J|=J
p
J
−1
˜Qθ′,J(δ, dδ′),
where
˜Kδ(θ, dθ′) def
= ˜Pδ([θ]δ, d[θ′]δ)
Y
j: δj=0
N(0, ρ−1
0 )(dθ′
j).
Recall that V (δ, θ) = P
j δjVj(θj). Given a selection J = {j1, . . . , jJ} ⊆{1, . . . , p},
and ji ∈J, we have
Z
∆
˜Qθ,ji(δ, dδ′)V (δ′, θ) = V (δ, θ)+˜qjiVji(θji)−δjiVji(θji) ≤V (δ, θ)+(1−δji)Vji(θji),
where ˜qj = ˜qj(ϑ, θ). It follows that
Z
∆
˜Qθ,J(δ, dδ′)V (δ′, θ) ≤V (δ, θ) +
J
X
i=1
Vji(θji)1{δji=0}.
(21)
Note that in deriving (21) we did not use any speciﬁc information about the proba-
bility ˜qj. In particular the kernel Qθ,J also satisﬁes (21). Using (21) we have
Z
Rp
˜Kδ(θ, dθ′)
Z
∆
˜Qθ′,J(δ, dδ′)V (δ′, θ′)
≤
Z
R∥δ∥0
˜Pδ([θ]δ, du)Vδ(u) +
J
X
i=1
Z
R
Vji(x)N(0, ρ−1
0 )(dx)
≤λδV (δ, θ) + bδ + C0J,
where the ﬁrst inequality uses the fact that under ˜Kδ, when δj = 0 we update θj by
drawing from N(0, ρ−1
0 ). With λ = maxδ λδ, we conclude that
Z
∆×Rp
˜K((δ, θ); (dδ′, dθ′))V (δ′, θ′) ≤λV (δ, θ) + C0.
(22)
Furthermore, ˜K is phi-irreducible and aperiodic by assumption, and the level sets
{(δ, θ) :
V (δ, θ) ≤b} are petite sets for ˜K.
Therefore, by Lemma 15.2.8, and
Theorem 15.0.1 of [42] ˜K admits a unique invariant distribution ˜Π, and (9) holds. □

24
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
Appendix B. Proof of Theorem 2
Throughout C0 denotes a generic constant whose value may change from one ap-
pearance to the next. We shall write Π(·) and ˜Π(·) instead of Π(·|D) and ˜Π(·|D)
respectively. For any two Markov kernels P1 and P2 and for any integer k ≥1, it is
easily checked that P k
1 = P k
2 + Pk
j=1 P k−j
1
(P1 −P2)P j−1
2
. Using this identity, for any
bounded measurable function f : ∆× Rp →R, writing ˜f = f −˜Π(f), we have for
any k ≥0,
Π(f) −˜Π(f) = Π( ˜f) = Π(Kk ˜f) = Π( ˜Kk ˜f) +
k
X
j=1
Π

(K −˜K) ˜Kj−1 ˜f

,
= Π( ˜Kk ˜f) + Π

(K −˜K)


k−1
X
j=0
˜Kj ˜f



.
(23)
Deﬁne
gk
def
=
k−1
X
j=0
˜Kj ˜f.
It follows from (9) that for all (δ, θ) ∈∆× Rp,
|gk(δ, θ)| ≤C0∥f∥∞V 1/2(δ, θ)
k−1
X
j=0
˜λj ≤C0∥f∥∞
1 −˜λ
V 1/2(δ, θ).
(24)
Without any loss generality we shall assume now that ∥f∥∞= 1. Since Π(V ) < ∞,
we get that
Π(f) −˜Π(f)
 ≤C0˜λk +
Z
∆×Rp Π(dδ, dθ)
Kgk(δ, θ) −˜Kgk(δ, θ)
 .
(25)
We split the integral over B and over Bc. For the part over Bc, we use the Cauchy-
Schwarz inequality, (24) and (22) to write

Z
Bc Π(dδ, dθ) ˜Kgk(δ, θ)
 ≤Π(Bc)1/2
sZ
Π(dδ, dθ)| ˜Kgk(δ, θ)|2 ≤Π(Bc)1/2 C0
1 −˜λ
Π(V |D)1/2.
Similarly,

Z
Bc Π(dδ, dθ)Kgk(δ, θ)
 ≤Π(Bc)1/2
sZ
Π(dδ, dθ)g2
k(δ, θ) ≤Π(Bc)1/2 C0
1 −˜λ
Π(V |D)1/2.
It follows that
Π(f) −˜Π(f)
 ≤C0˜λk + C0
p
Π(Bc)
1 −˜λ
+
Z
B
Π(dδ, dθ)
Kgk(δ, θ) −˜Kgk(δ, θ)
 .
(26)
We will use the following simple version of the coupling inequality ([36]).

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
25
Lemma 6. Let µ, ν, be two probability measures on some Polish space (X, B), and
f : X →R a measurable function. Then
|µ(f) −ν(f)| ≤∥µ −ν∥1/2
tv
 sZ
f 2dµ +
sZ
f 2dν
!
.
Proof. Let (X, Y ) be a maximal coupling of (µ, ν). Then
|µ(f) −ν(f)| =
E

1{X̸=Y } (f(X) −f(Y ))
 ≤∥µ −ν∥1/2
tv E1/2 (f(X) −f(Y ))2
.
The result then follows from the Minkowski inequality.
□
We will apply this lemma in the following context. Let ¯µ(dx, dy) = µ1(dx)µ2(x, dy),
¯ν(dx, dy) = ν1(dx)ν2(x, dy) be two probability measures on some Polish space X ×Y,
and let f : X × Y →R be a measurable function. Then by writing
¯µ(f) −¯ν(f) =
Z
X
µ1(dx)fµ(x) −
Z
X
ν1(dx)fµ(x)

+
Z
X
ν1(dx)
Z
Y
µ2(x, dy)f(x, y) −
Z
X
ν1(dx)
Z
Y
ν2(x, dy)f(x, y)

,
where fµ(x) def
=
R
Y µ2(x, dy)f(x, y), we deduce from Lemma 6 that if C < ∞is such
that
R
X
R
Y f 2(x, y)µ1(dx)µ2(x, dy) ≤C2,
R
X
R
Y f 2(x, y)ν1(dx)ν2(x, dy) ≤C2, and
R
X
R
Y f 2(x, y)ν1(dx)µ2(x, dy) ≤C2, then
|¯µ(f) −¯ν(f)| ≤C

∥µ1 −ν1∥1/2
tv +

Z
ν1(dx)µ2(x, ·) −
Z
ν1(dx)ν2(x, ·)

1/2
tv
!
. (27)
We apply (27) to Kgk(δ, θ) −˜Kgk(δ, θ). Indeed, for (δ, θ) ∈B, using (10), we have
Kg2
k(δ, θ) ≤
C2
0
(1 −˜λ)2 KV (δ, θ) ≤
C2
0
(1 −˜λ)2 ,
˜Kg2
k(δ, θ) ≤
C2
0
(1 −˜λ)2 ,
and since Qθ,J also satisﬁes (21), we similarly have
Z
˜Kδ(θ, dθ′)
X
J: |J|=J
p
J
−1 Z
∆
Qθ′,J(δ, dδ′)g2
k(δ′, θ′) ≤
C2
0
(1 −˜λ)2 .
Therefore (27) and (26) yield
Π(f) −˜Π(f)
 ≤C0˜λk + C0
p
Π(Bc)
1 −˜λ
+
C0
1 −˜λ
sup
(δ,θ)∈B
∥Pδ([θ]δ, ·) −˜Pδ([θ]δ, ·)∥1/2
tv
+
C0
1 −˜λ
sup
(δ,θ)∈B

Z
˜Kδ(θ, dθ′)
X
J: |J|=J
p
J
−1
Qθ′,J(δ, ·) −˜Qθ′,J(δ, ·)


1/2
tv
.
(28)
The result then follows by taking k →∞.
□

26
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
Appendix C. Proof of Theorem 5
We recall that P and E denote the probability measure and expectation operator
of the Markov chains deﬁned by Algorithms 1 and 2 (more speciﬁcally their coupling
distribution as constructed below), and P⋆and E⋆denote the probability measure
and expectation operator of the data Y as assumed in H3.
Throughout we will use C to denote a generic constant that depends only on the
constants appearing in H3 (σ2, ∥θ⋆∥∞, c0, c1 and c2). The actual value of C may vary
from one appearance to the next.
We use a similar argument as in [19]. Let {δ(k), k ≥0} denote the δ-marginal chain
of Algorithm 2, and let {ˇδ(k), k ≥0} be the δ-marginal chain of Algorithm 1. These
processes are also Markov chains because in both cases we have taken Pδ = ˜Pδ to be
an exact draw from the posterior conditional distribution of θ given δ. We construct
a coupling of {δ(k), k ≥0} and the stationary version of {ˇδ(k), k ≥0} as follows.
First take δ(0) as the null model, and draw ˇδ(0) ∼Π(·|D), the marginal distribution
of δ in (2). For each k ≥0, given (δ(k), ˇδ(k)), we do the following.
(1) Given δ(k), ˇδ(k), we independently draw θ(k) ∼Π(·|δ(k), D), ˇθ(k) ∼Π(·|ˇδ(k), D),
and we select a random subset J(k) = {J(k)
1 , . . . , J(k)
J } of size J from {1, . . . , p}.
(2) We deﬁne ϑ ∈∆as ϑi = 0 if i ∈J(k), and ϑi = δ(k)
i
otherwise. We also deﬁne
ϑ(0) = δ(k), and ˇϑ(0) = ˇδ(k). For each r ∈{1, . . . , J}, given J(k)
r
= j, we then
do the following.
(a) We draw (d(k)
r , ˇd(k)
r ) from the maximal coupling of Ber(˜qj(ϑ, θ(k))) and
Ber(qj(ˇϑ(r−1), ˇθ(k))), where qj and ˜qj are given by (4) and (5) respectively.
(b) We set ϑ(r)
j
= d(k)
r , ˇϑ(r)
j
= ˇd(k)
r , and ϑ(r)
i
= ϑ(r−1)
i
, ˇϑ(r)
i
= ˇϑ(r−1)
i
, for i̸ = j.
(3) Set δ(k+1) = ϑ(J), and ˇδ(k+1) = ˇϑ(J).
By construction, the marginal chain {δ(k) k ≥0} (resp. {ˇδ(k) k ≥0}) from the
above construction is the asynchronous sampler from Algorithm 2 (resp. a stationary
version of Algorithm 1). By the coupling inequality
E⋆

max
j: δ⋆j=1 |P(δ(k)
j
= 1) −Π(δj = 1|D)|

≤E⋆

max
j: δ⋆j=1 P(δ(k)
j̸
= ˇδ(k)
j )

.
(29)
Hence the main part of the proof consists in bounding the right-hand side of the
last display. We do this in paragraph (e). Paragraphs (a)-(d) collect some needed
implications of H3.
(a) Restricted eigenvalues.
Given s > 0, Let δ ∈∆be such that 0 < ∥δ∥0 ≤s,
and let u ∈R∥δ∥0. Using | ⟨Xi, Xj⟩| ≤
p
c0n log(p) from H3-(1), and ∥Xj∥2 = √n,

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
27
we have
u′(X′
δXδ)u ≥n∥u∥2
2 −
p
c0n log(p)
X
i̸=j
|uiuj| ≥

n −s
p
c0n log(p)

∥u∥2
2.
We conclude that if the sample size satisﬁes n ≥4c0s2 log(p), then
λmin
X′
δXδ

≥n
2, for all δ ∈∆, s. t. 0 < ∥δ∥0 ≤s,
(30)
where λmin(A) denotes the smallest eigenvalue of A.
(b) Implications of the sub-Gaussian regression errors.
For δ ∈∆, we
deﬁne
Lδ
def
= In + 1
σ2 XδX′
δ.
We convene that Lδ = In, for δ = 0. Clearly, ∥L−1
δ ∥2 ≤1. Given s ≥0 (here we allow
s to be 0), and for some constant c > 0, we set
Es
def
=

y ∈Rn : max
1≤j≤p
max
δ: ∥δ∥0≤s σ−1
L−1
δ Xj, y −Xθ⋆
 ≤
p
c(1 + s)n log(p)

.
Using the sub-Gaussianity of the regression error term in H3-(2), and by a union
bound argument, we can choose c > 0 depending solely on the absolute constant c1
in H3-(2), such that for all s ≥0,
P⋆(Y /∈Es) ≤p
p
s

c1 exp

−c(1 + s)n log(p)
2n

≤c1ps+1
p
c(1+s)
2
≤1
p,
(31)
where we use the fact that
p
s

≤ps. Throughout the proof, whenever we use the
event Es, the constant c is always taken as above.
(c) Sparse MCMC output.
It will be important in the proof to guarantee that the
Markov chain {δ(k), k ≥1} remains in the set ∆s
def
= {δ ∈∆: ∥δ∥0 ≤s} for some
small value of s. The following result could probably be improved, but will serve the
purpose. Let
s1
def
= s⋆+ 2 log(p).
We show in Lemma 7 that under the sample size condition (18), and u taken large
enough as in (18), it holds
1E0(Y ) max
k≥0 P

∥δ(k)∥0 > s1

≤1
p.
(32)

28
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
(d) Posterior contraction.
We show below that the posterior distribution Π(·|D)
puts most probability mass on sparse super-sets of δ⋆. More precisely, by Lemma 9
we can ﬁnd constants C1, C2 that depends only on the constants appearing in H3
(σ2, ∥θ⋆∥∞, c0, c1 and c2) such that for n, p such that n ≥C1(1 + s3
⋆) log(p), it holds
E⋆

1Es⋆(Y )Π(C|D)

≥1 −2
p,
where
C def
= {δ ∈∆: δ ⊇δ⋆, and ∥δ∥0 ≤C2(1 + s⋆)} .
We set
s2
def
= C2(1 + s⋆).
Furthermore the linear regression setting implies that the conditional posterior dis-
tribution of θ|δ is given by
[θ]δc | δ
i.i.d.
∼N(0, ρ−1
0 ),
and
[θ]δ | δ ∼N

ˆθδ, σ2 σ2ρ1I∥δ∥0 + X′
δXδ
−1
,
(33)
where
ˆθδ
def
= Argmaxu∈R∥δ∥0

−1
2σ2 ∥y −Xδu∥2
2 −ρ1
2 ∥u∥2
2

=
X′
δXδ + ρ1σ2I∥δ∥0
−1 X′
δy.
Therefore, if for some M > 0 we set
Bδ
def
=
(
θ ∈Rp : ∥θ −θδ∥∞≤
s
M log(p)
ρ0
and
∥θδ −ˆθδ∥∞≤
r
Mσ log(p)
n
)
,
then, provided that n ≥Cs2 log(p), for some constant C, by the restricted eigenvalue
bound in (30), and by Gaussian tail bounds and a union bound argument, for all
δ ∈∆s, we have
Π (Bc
δ|δ, D) ≤
4
p−1+M/2 ≤1
p,
(34)
by taking M > 2 appropriately.
(e) Main arguments of the proof.
With s1 as in Paragraph (c) and s2 as in
Paragraph (d), we set
s def
= max(s1, s2).
Fix Y ∈Es⋆, and ﬁx some arbitrary component j such that δ⋆j = 1. We ﬁrst note that
δ(k+1)
j̸
= ˇδ(k+1)
j
if and only if j ∈J(k), and the corresponding Bernoulli’s (d(k)
r , ˇd(k)
r )

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
29
are diﬀerent, or δ(k)
j̸
= ˇδ(k)
j
, and j /∈J(k). We write this as
P
h
δ(k+1)
j̸
= ˇδ(k+1)
j
|δ(k), ˇδ(k)i
= 1n
δ(k)
j̸
=ˇδ(k)
j
o

1 −J
p

+
J
X
r=1
P
h
J(k)
r
= j, d(k)
r̸
= ˇd(k)
r |δ(k), ˇδ(k)i
= 1n
δ(k)
j̸
=ˇδ(k)
j
o

1 −J
p

+ 1
p
J
X
r=1
P
h
d(k)
r̸
= ˇd(k)
r |J(k)
r
= j, δ(k), ˇδ(k)i
,
where we use the fact that P(J(k)
r
= j|δ(k), ˇδ(k)) = 1/p. With s1, s2 as above, we
introduce the set T def
= ∆s1 × Cs2 where,
∆s1
def
= {δ ∈∆: ∥δ∥0 ≤s1} ,
and
Cs2
def
= {δ ∈∆: δ ⊇δ⋆, ∥δ∥0 ≤s2} .
It follows that
P
h
δ(k+1)
j̸
= ˇδ(k+1)
j
|δ(k), ˇδ(k)i
≤1n
δ(k)
j̸
=ˇδ(k)
j
o

1 −J
p

+ 1T(δ(k), ˇδ(k))1
p
J
X
r=1
P
h
d(k)
r̸
= ˇd(k)
r |J(k)
r
= j, δ(k), ˇδ(k)i
+ J
p 1Tc(δ(k), ˇδ(k)).
Let us set
A(k) def
= P

(δ(k), ˇδ(k)) /∈T

, I(k)
r,j (θ, ˇθ) def
= P

d(k)
r̸
= ˇd(k)
r |J(k)
r
= j, δ(k), ˇδ(k), θ, ˇθ

.
Taking expectation on both sides of the last inequality, we get
P

δ(k+1)
j̸
= ˇδ(k+1)
j

≤

1 −J
p

P

δ(k)
j̸
= ˇδ(k)
j

+ JA(k)
p
+1
p
J
X
r=1
E
h
1T(δ(k), ˇδ(k))P

dr̸ = ˇdr|J(k)
r
= j, δ(k), ˇδ(k)i
,
=

1 −J
p

P

δ(k)
j̸
= ˇδ(k)
j

+ JA(k)
p
(35)
+1
p
J
X
r=1
E

1T(δ(k), ˇδ(k))
Z
I(k)
r,j (θ, ˇθ) Π(dθ|δ(k), D) Π(dˇθ|ˇδ(k), D)

.

30
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
We establish the following claim below
1T(δ(k), ˇδ(k))
Z
I(k)
r,j (θ, ˇθ) Π(dθ|δ(k), D) Π(dˇθ|ˇδ(k), D)
≤

e−C√nθ⋆+ 1
p

+ 7
101{δ(k)
j̸
=ˇδ(k)
j
}.
(36)
Using (36) in (35), we obtain
P

δ(k+1)
j̸
= ˇδ(k+1)
j

≤

1 −J
p

P

δ(k)
j̸
= ˇδ(k)
j

+ JA(k)
p
+ J
p

e−C√nθ⋆+ 1
p

+ 7
10
J
p P

δ(k)
j̸
= ˇδ(k)
j

≤

1 −3
10
J
p

P

δ(k)
j̸
= ˇδ(k)
j

+ J
p

A(k) + e−C√nθ⋆+ 1
p

.
(37)
Iterating (37) yields
max
j: δ⋆j=1 P

δ(k)
j̸
= ˇδ(k)
j

≤

1 −3
10
J
p
k
+ 10
3

e−C√nθ⋆+ 1
p

+ J
p
k−1
X
t=0

1 −3
10
J
p
t
A(k−t).
(38)
Recall that
A(k) def
= P

(δ(k), ˇδ(k)) /∈T

≤P(∥δ(k)∥0 > s1) + Π(Cc
s2|D),
where Cc
s2
def
= ∆\ Cs2. By Lemma 7 and Lemma 9 below, we have
1Es⋆(Y ) max
k≥0 P(∥δ(k)∥0 > s1) ≤1
p, and
E⋆

1Es⋆(Y )Π(Cc
s2|D)

≤1
p.
Taking the expectation over the data Y in (38), and using the last display and
(29), we deduce that
E⋆

1E(Y ) max
j: δ⋆j=1
P(δ(k)
j
= 1) −Π(δj = 1|D)


≤

1 −3
10
J
p
k
+ 10
3

e−C√nθ⋆+ 1
p + 2
p

≤

1 −3
10
J
p
k
+ 10

e−C√nθ⋆+ 1
p

.
(39)
It remains only to establish the claim (36).
Proof of Claim (36).
We consider two cases.

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
31
Case 1: δ(k)
j̸
= ˇδ(k)
j
.
Since ˇδ(k) ∈Cs1 (which implies that ˇδ(k)
j
= 1), we must then
have δ(k)
j
= 0, and ˇδ(k)
j
= 1. Set
S def
=

(θ, ˇθ) ∈Rp × Rp : θ ∈Bδ(k), ˇθ ∈Bˇδ(k),
and
r
1
100ρ0
≤sign(θ⋆j)θj ≤
r 4
ρ0

.
It follows from (34) and the fact that θ(k)
j |{δ(k)
j
= 0} ∼N(0, ρ−1
0 ) that for (δ(k), ˇδ(k)) ∈
T,
P

(θ(k), ˇθ(k)) /∈S|δ(k), ˇδ(k)
≤
4
pM/2 + 3
5 ≤7
10.
(40)
First we note that for (θ, ˇθ) ∈S, |θj| ≤2/√ρ0 ≤Cn−1/2. Whereas for i̸ = j and
δ(k)
i
= 0, we have |θi| ≤
p
M log(p)/n, and if δ(k)
i
= 1, using (34), and Lemma 8-(1),
|θi| = |θi −ˆθi| + |ˆθi −θ⋆i| + |θ⋆i| ≤C
r
log(p)
n
+ C
r
log(p)
n
+ ∥θ⋆∥∞≤C,
under the sample size condition (18). Using the expression ˜qj in (5), and since ρ0 ≥ρ1,
and ignoring the nonpositive quadratic term, we have
1 −˜qj(ϑ, θ) ≤exp

a −θj
σ2 ⟨Xj, y −Xθϑ⟩

.
We write
⟨Xj, y −Xθϑ⟩= [⟨Xj, Xθδ(k)⟩−⟨Xj, Xθϑ⟩] + ⟨Xj, y −Xθδ(k)⟩.
Since |θi| ≤C, for δ(k)
i
= 1, we have
|⟨Xj, Xθϑ⟩−⟨Xj, Xθδ(k)⟩| =

X
r∈J(k):r̸=j, δ(k)
r
=1
⟨Xj, Xr⟩θr

≤C min(J, s1)
p
n log(p).
We can rewrite the last display as
|⟨Xj, y −Xθϑ⟩−⟨Xj, y −Xθδ(k)⟩| ≤C min(J, s1)
p
n log(p).
We further expand the term ⟨Xj, y −Xθδ(k)⟩as
⟨Xj, y −Xθδ(k)⟩= ⟨Xj, y −Xθ⋆⟩+ ⟨Xj, Xθ⋆−Xδ(k)[θ⋆]δ(k)⟩
+ ⟨Xj, Xδ(k)([θ⋆]δ(k) −[θ]δ(k))⟩.
Note that
⟨Xj, Xθ⋆−Xδ[θ⋆]δ(k)⟩= nθ⋆j +
X
r: δ⋆r=1,δ(k)
r
=0
θ⋆r ⟨Xj, Xr⟩.

32
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
For θ ∈Bδ(k),
|⟨Xj, Xδ(k)([θ⋆]δ(k) −[θ]δ(k))⟩| ≤s1
p
c0n log(p)∥[θ⋆]δ(k) −[θ]δ(k)∥∞
≤Cs1
p
n log(p)

∥[θ⋆]δ(k) −ˆθδ(k)∥∞+
r
log(p)
n
!
≤C(1 + m(δ(k)))s1 log(p),
where the last inequality uses Lemma 8. Using this, and since δ⋆j = 1, for θ ∈Bδ(k)
we have
|⟨Xj, y −Xθϑ⟩−nθ⋆j| ≤C min(s1, J)
p
n log(p) + | ⟨Xj, y −Xθ⋆⟩|
+
X
r: δ⋆r=1,δ(k)
r
=0
|θ⋆r ⟨Xj, Xr⟩| + C(1 + m(δ(k)))s1 log(p)
≤C (s⋆+ min(J, s1))
p
n log(p),
(41)
using the sample size condition n ≥s2
1 log(p). Since |θj| ≤Cn−1/2, we conclude that
|θj|| ⟨Xj, y −Xθϑ⟩−nθ⋆j| ≤C (s⋆+ min(J, s1))
p
log(p).
It follows that for (θ, ˇθ) ∈S,
θj
σ2 ⟨Xj, y −Xθϑ⟩≥nθ⋆jθj
σ2
−C (s⋆+ min(J, s1))
p
log(p)
≥|θ⋆j|√n
10σ2
−C (s⋆+ min(J, s1))
p
log(p) ≥|θ⋆j|√n
20σ2 ,
under the sample size condition (18).
Hence, since a = u log(p) + log(ρ0)/2, for
(θ, ˇθ) ∈S
1 −˜qj(ϑ, θ) ≤exp

u log(p) + 1
2 log
 n
σ2

−
√nθ⋆
20σ

≤e−C√nθ⋆.
(42)
We handle 1 −qj(ˇϑ(r−1), θ) similarly: since ρ0 ≥ρ1,
1 −qj(ˇϑ(r−1), ˇθ) ≤exp

a +
nˇθ2
j
2σ2 −
ˇθj
σ2
D
Xj, y −X ˇθ(ˇϑ(r−1))(j,0)
E!
.
The inequality (41) remains valid when applied to ˇθ and (ˇϑ(r−1))(j,0) (but with
min(J, s1) replaced by J), and yields

D
Xj, y −X ˇθ(ˇϑ(r−1))(j,0)
E
−nθ⋆j
 ≤C (s⋆+ J)
p
n log(p),

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
33
leading to
−
ˇθj
σ2
D
Xj, y −X ˇθ(ˇϑ(r−1))(j,0)
E
≤−n
σ2 θ2
⋆j + nθ⋆j
σ2 |ˇθj −θ⋆j| + C (s⋆+ J)
p
n log(p)
≤n
σ2 θ2
⋆j + C (s⋆+ J)
p
n log(p),
where we use Lemma 8 to derive the bound |ˇθj −θ⋆j| ≤

|ˇθj −ˆθj| + |ˆθj −θ⋆j|

≤
C
p
n/ log(p). The same bound implies that
nˇθ2
j
2σ2 =
nθ2
⋆j
2σ2 +
n(ˇθ2
j −θ2
⋆j)
2σ2
≤
nθ2
⋆j
2σ2 + C
p
n log(p).
We conclude that
nˇθ2
j
2σ2 −
ˇθj
σ2
D
Xj, y −X ˇθ(ˇϑ(r−1))(j,0)
E
≤−
nθ2
⋆j
2σ2 + C (s⋆+ J)
p
n log(p) ≤−nθ⋆2
4σ2 ,
under the sample size condition (18). Hence
1 −qj(ˇϑ(r−1), ˇθ) ≤exp

a −nθ⋆2
4σ2
!
≤e−Cnθ2
⋆.
(43)
Since the Bernoulli random variables d(k)
r
and ˇd(k)
r
are maximally coupled, (42) and
(43) imply that for (δ(k), ˇδ(k)) ∈T, and δ(k)
j̸
= ˇδ(k)
k ,
Z
I(k)
r,j (θ, ˇθ) Π(dθ|δ(k), D) Π(dˇθ|ˇδ(k), D) ≤e−C√nθ⋆+ 7
10.
(44)
Case 2: δ(k)
j
= ˇδ(k)
j
.
Since ˇδ(k) ∈Cs1, we must then have δ(k)
j
= ˇδ(k)
j
= 1. Here we
deﬁne the set S as
S def
=

(θ, ˇθ) ∈Rp × Rp : θ ∈Bδ(k), ˇθ ∈Bˇδ(k)

.
It follows from (34) that for (δ(k), ˇδ(k)) ∈T,
P

(θ(k), ˇθ(k)) /∈S|δ(k), ˇδ(k)
≤
4
p1−M/2 .
(45)
For (δ(k), ˇδ(k)) ∈T, and (θ, ˇθ) ∈S, the calculations on 1 −qj(ˇϑ(r−1), ˇθ) remain valid,
and we have
1 −qj(ˇϑ(r−1), ˇθ) ≤e−Cnθ2
⋆.

34
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
For δ(k)
j
= 1, and θ ∈Bδ(k), it follows from (41) that
θj ⟨Xj, y −Xθϑ⟩≥
nθ2
⋆j
σ2 −C (s⋆+ min(J, s1))
p
n log(p) ≥nθ2
⋆
2σ2 ,
under the sample size condition (18). We deduce that
1 −˜qj(ϑ, θ)
≤
exp

a −θj
σ2 ⟨Xj, y −Xθϑ⟩

≤
exp

a −nθ2
⋆
2σ2

≤
e−Cnθ2
⋆.
The last two majorations on 1 −qj(ˇϑ(r−1), ˇθ) and 1 −˜qj(ϑ, θ), and (45) implies that
for δ(k)
j
= ˇδ(k)
j
,
Z
I(k)
r,j (θ, ˇθ) Π(dθ|δ(k), D) Π(dˇθ|ˇδ(k), D) ≤e−Cnθ2
⋆+
4
p1−M/2 .
(46)
The claim (36) follows from (42) and (46) together.
□
C.1. Technical lemmas.
Lemma 7. Assume H3, and let E0 as in (31). Let {δ(k), k ≥0} be the δ-marginal
chain generated by Algorithm 2 for the linear regression posterior.
There exists a
constant C > 0 that depends only on c (in the deﬁnition of E0) and the constants in
H3 such that for
u ≥C(1 + s2
⋆),
and
n ≥

∥δ(0)∥0 + s⋆+ 2 log(p)
2
log(p),
(47)
it holds
1E0(Y )P

∥δ(k)∥0 > ∥δ(0)∥0 + s⋆+ 2 log(p)

≤
p −s⋆
2p
s−∥δ(0)∥0−s⋆
≤1
p.
Proof. Fix Y ∈E0.
Set s1
def
= ∥δ(0)∥0 + s⋆+ 2 log(p).
Referring to the coupling
construction at the beginning of the proof, the event {∥δ(k)∥0 > s1} means that we can
ﬁnd at least s1 −∥δ(0)∥0 −s⋆terms among {(δ(t), J(t)
r , d(t)
r ), 1 ≤t ≤k −1, 1 ≤r ≤J}
where ∥δ(t)∥0 ≤s1, J(t)
r
∈{j : δ⋆j = 0, and δ(t)
j
= 0}, and d(t)
r
= 1.
P

J(t)
r
∈{j : δ⋆j = 0, and δ(t)
j
= 0}|δ(t)
≤1 −s⋆
p .
We show next that on the event ∥δ(t)∥0 ≤s1, and J(t)
r
∈{j : δ⋆j = 0, and δ(t)
j
= 0},
P

d(t)
r
= 1|δ(t), J(t)
r
= j

≤1
2,
(48)
to conclude that
P

∥δ(k)∥0 > s1

≤
p −s⋆
2p
s1−∥δ(0)∥0−s⋆
≤exp

−(s1 −∥δ(0)∥0 −s⋆) log(2)

≤1
p,

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
35
which would end the proof. In order to prove (48), for some absolute constant m > 0,
let
S def
=

θ ∈Rp : θ ∈Bδ(t),
and
|θj| ≤
rm
ρ0

.
As seen in (34), we can choose m such that Π(θ /∈S|δ(t), D) ≤1
4. Fix j such that
δ⋆j = 0 and δ(t)
j
= 0. Recalling the expression of ˜qj in (5), it follows then that
P

d(t)
r
= 1|J(t)
r
= j, δ(t)
≤1
4+
Z
S
exp

−a +
θ2
j
2 (ρ0 −ρ1) + θj
σ2 ⟨Xj, y −Xθϑ⟩+
θ2
j
2σ4 ⟨Xj, y −Xθϑ⟩2
!
Π(θ|δ(t), D)dθ.
Then we write
⟨Xj, y −Xθϑ⟩= ⟨Xj, y −Xθ⋆⟩+ ⟨Xj, Xθ⋆−Xθϑ⟩
= ⟨Xj, y −Xθ⋆⟩+
X
r̸=j
⟨Xj, Xr⟩(θ⋆r −θrϑr).
The last summation does not include j because θ⋆j = 0, and J(t)
r
= j, which implies
that ϑj = 0. Since θ ∈S, we see that |θ⋆r −θrϑr| ≤C for all r, for some constant C.
If δ⋆r = 0, then |θr| ≤C
p
log(p)/n. It follows that for Y ∈E0,
|θj ⟨Xj, y −Xθϑ⟩| ≤|θj|

p
cn log(p) + Cs⋆
p
c0n log(p) + Cs1
r
log(p)
n
p
c0n log(p)
!
≤C|θj|

s⋆
p
n log(p) + s1 log(p)

≤Cs⋆
p
log(p),
under the sample size condition n ≥s2
1 log(p). Hence taking u > C(1 + s⋆)2 large
enough, it follows that
P

d(t)
r
= 1|J(t)
r
= j, δ(t)
≤1
4+
Z
S
exp

−u log(p) −1
2 log
 n
σ2

+ C(1 + s⋆)2 log(p)

Π(θ|δ(t), D)dθ+1
4 ≤1
4+1
4 ≤1
2.
□
Lemma 8. Assume H3, and let E0 as in (31). Fix 0 < s1 ≤p. Then we can ﬁnd
constants C, C′ that depends only on σ2, ∥θ⋆∥∞, c0, and c (in the deﬁnition of E0) such
that for n ≥Cs2
1 log(p), the following holds. For all δ ∈∆such that ∥δ∥0 ≤s1,
∥ˆθδ −[θ⋆]δ∥∞≤C′ (1 + m(δ))
r
log(p)
n
,
(49)
where m(δ) def
= |{k : δ⋆k = 1, δk = 0}|, and ˆθδ as in (33).

36
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
Proof. The proof follows ([39] Theorem 1). Fix Y ∈E0. The ﬁrst order optimality
condition of ˆθδ is given by −ρ1ˆθδ + X′
δ(Y −Xδ ˆθδ)/σ2 = 0, which can be rewritten as

ρ1I∥δ∥0 + 1
σ2 X′
δXδ

([θ⋆]δ−ˆθδ)−ρ1[θ⋆]δ+ 1
σ2 X′
δ(Xθ⋆−Xδ[θ⋆]δ)+ 1
σ2 X′
δ(Y −Xθ⋆) = 0.
We deduce that


ρ1I∥δ∥0 + 1
σ2 X′
δXδ

([θ⋆]δ −ˆθδ)

∞
≤ρ1∥θ⋆∥∞
+ 1
σ2 max
k: δk=1
X
j: δ⋆j=1,δj=0
|θ⋆j|| ⟨Xj, Xk⟩| + 1
σ
p
cn log(p)
≤C(1 + m(δ))
p
n log(p).
Using this conclusion and the restricted strong convexity in (30), for n ≥Cs2
1 log(p),
we have
n
2∥ˆθδ −[θ⋆]δ∥2
2 ≤(ˆθδ −[θ⋆]δ)′

ρ1I∥δ∥0 + 1
σ2 X′
δXδ

(ˆθδ −[θ⋆]δ)
≤C(1 + m(δ))
p
n log(p)∥ˆθδ −[θ⋆]δ∥1
≤Cs1/2
1
(1 + m(δ))
p
n log(p)∥ˆθδ −[θ⋆]δ∥2,
which implies that
∥ˆθδ −[θ⋆]δ∥2 ≤C(1 + m(δ))
r
s1 log(p)
n
.
On the other hand for j such that δj = 1,

ρ1I∥δ∥0 + 1
σ2 X′
δXδ

([θ⋆]δ −ˆθδ)

j
= (ρ1 + n
σ2 )

ˆθδ −[θ⋆]δ

j
+ 1
σ2
X
k̸=j: δk=1
⟨Xk, Xj⟩

ˆθδ −[θ⋆]δ

k ,
which we use to deduce that
∥ˆθδ−[θ⋆]δ∥∞≤σ2
n


ρ1I∥δ∥0 + 1
σ2 X′
δXδ

([θ⋆]δ −ˆθδ)

∞
+ 1
n
p
c0n log(p)∥ˆθδ−[θ⋆]δ∥1
≤C(1 + m(δ))
r
log(p)
n
+ s1/2
1
r
c0 log(p)
n
∥ˆθδ −[θ⋆]δ∥2
≤C(1 + m(δ))
r
log(p)
n
+ C(1 + m(δ))
r
log(p)
n
r
s2
1 log(p)
n
≤C(1 + m(δ))
r
log(p)
n
,

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
37
under the stated sample size condition.
□
We show in the next result that the posterior distribution puts most of its proba-
bility mass on models that contain the true model δ⋆.
Lemma 9. Assume H3, and let Es⋆be as in (31). Then we can ﬁnd constants C1, C2
that depends only on σ2, ∥θ⋆∥∞, c0, c1 c2 and c (in the deﬁnition of Es⋆) such that for
n ≥C1θ−2
⋆(1 + s3
⋆) log(p), it holds
E⋆

1Es⋆(Y )Π(C|D)

≥1 −3
p,
where
C def
= {δ ∈∆: δ ⊇δ⋆,
and ∥δ∥0 ≤C2(1 + s⋆)} .
Proof. By Lemma 11, there exist positive constant C1, C2 that depends only on c0, c2,
and c such that for n ≥C1s2
⋆log(p),
E⋆[1E0(Y )Π (∥δ∥0 > C2(1 + s⋆) | D)] ≤2
p.
We set
s def
= C2(1 + s⋆),
and A def
= {δ : δ ⊉δ⋆, ∥δ∥0 ≤s}, so that
∆= Cs ∪A ∪{δ ∈∆: ∥δ∥0 > s} .
Therefore,
E⋆

1Es⋆(Y )Π(Cs|D)

≥1 −2
p −E⋆

1Es⋆(Y )Π (A|D)

.
To ﬁnish the proof we will establish that for Y ∈Es⋆, Π (A|D) ≤1
p. To that end, let
P def
= {δ(0) ∈∆: δ(0) ⊆δ⋆, δ(0)̸ = δ⋆}, and for each δ(0) ∈P, we set
A(δ(0)) def
=
n
δ ∈∆: δ ⊇δ(0), ∥δ∥0 ≤s1, and δ⋆j = 0 whenever (δj = 1, and δ(0)
j
= 0)
o
.
We then write
Π(A|D) = Π(δ⋆|D)
X
δ(0)∈P
Π(δ(0)|D)
Π(δ⋆|D)
X
δ∈A(δ(0))
Π(δ|D)
Π(δ(0)|D).
(50)
For any subset δ, ϑ ∈∆, we have
Π(δ|D)
Π(ϑ|D) =
 1
pu
r ρ1
2π
∥δ∥0−∥ϑ∥0 R
R∥δ∥0 exp
−ρ1
2 ∥u∥2
2 −
1
2σ2 ∥Y −Xδu∥2
2

du
R
R∥ϑ∥0 exp
−ρ1
2 ∥u∥2
2 −
1
2σ2 ∥Y −Xϑu∥2
2

du.

38
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
We calculate that for any δ ∈∆,
Z
R∥δ∥0
exp

−ρ1
2 ∥u∥2
2 −
1
2σ2 ∥Y −Xδu∥2
2

du =
2π
ρ1
∥δ∥0/2 e
−
1
2σ2 Y ′
In+
1
ρ1σ2 XδX′
δ
−1
Y
r
det

In +
1
ρ1σ2 XδX′
δ
 .
And we deduce, using ρ1 = 1, that
Π(δ|D)
Π(ϑ|D) =
 1
pu
∥δ∥0−∥ϑ∥0
e
1
2σ2 (Y ′L−1
ϑ Y −Y ′L−1
δ
Y )
s
det (Lϑ)
det (Lδ) ,
(51)
where
Lδ
def
= In + 1
σ2 XδX′
δ.
Suppose that ϑ ⊇δ, and ∥ϑ∥0 ≤s1. In that case
Lϑ = Lδ + 1
σ2 Xϑ−δX′
ϑ−δ.
and by the determinant lemma (det(A + UV ′) = det(A) det(Im + V ′A−1U) valid for
any invertible matrix A ∈Rn×n, and U, V ∈Rn×m), and using the lower bound on
the smallest eigenvalue of Lδ resulting from (30), we have
1 ≤det (Lϑ)
det (Lδ) = det

Iϑ−δ + 1
σ2 X′
ϑ−δL−1
δ Xϑ−δ

≤(1 + 2∥ϑ −δ∥0)∥ϑ−δ∥0 .
We use this to deduce from (51) that when ϑ ⊇δ, and ∥ϑ∥0 ≤s, it holds
pu∥ϑ−δ∥0e
1
2σ2(Y ′L−1
ϑ Y −Y ′L−1
δ
Y ) ≤Π(δ|D)
Π(ϑ|D)
≤pu∥ϑ−δ∥0 (1 + 2s)∥ϑ−δ∥0 e
1
2σ2 (Y ′L−1
ϑ Y −Y ′L−1
δ
Y ).
(52)
By the Woodbury formula which states that any set of matrices U, V, A, C with match-
ing dimensions, (A + UCV )−1 = A−1 −A−1U(C−1 + V A−1U)−1V A−1, we have
Y ′L−1
ϑ Y −Y ′L−1
δ Y = −1
σ2 y′L−1
δ Xϑ−δ

I∥ϑ−δ∥0 + 1
σ2 X′
ϑ−δL−1
δ Xϑ−δ
−1
Xϑ−δL−1
δ y.
It follows from Equation (54) of Lemma 10 that for any non-zero vector u ∈R∥ϑ−δ∥0,
u′X′
ϑ−δL−1
δ Xϑ−δu ≥n
2∥u∥2
2 −C0
p
n log(p)∥u∥2
1 ≥n
4 ∥u∥2
2,
for some absolute constant C0, provided that n ≥4C2
0s2 log(p). We deduce that for
δ ⊆ϑ, ∥ϑ∥0 ≤s, it holds
∥Y ′L−1
δ Xϑ−δ∥2
2
σ2(1 + ∥ϑ −δ∥0n) ≤Y ′L−1
δ Y −Y ′L−1
ϑ Y ≤4∥Y ′L−1
δ Xϑ−δ∥2
2
σ2n
.
(53)

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
39
We put (53) and (52) to write the second summation of (50) as
X
δ∈A(δ(0))
Π(δ|D)
Π(δ(0)|D) =
s−∥δ(0)∥0
X
k=0
X
δ∈A(δ(0)): ∥δ∥0=∥δ(0)∥0+k
Π(δ|D)
Π(δ(0)|D)
≤
s−∥δ(0)∥0
X
k=0
X
δ∈A(δ(0)): ∥δ∥0=∥δ(0)∥0+k
 1
pu
k
exp



2
Y ′L−1
δ(0)Xδ−δ(0)

2
2
σ4n


.
We can write Y = σV + P
k: δ⋆k=1 θ⋆kXk, where V = (Y −Xθ⋆)/σ. Fix a component
i such that (δ −δ(0))i = 1. Note that we have δ(0)
i
= 0, and δ⋆i = 0. We can then
write
Y ′L−1
δ(0)Xi = σV ′L−1
δ(0)Xi +
X
k: δ⋆k=1
θ⋆kX′
kL−1
δ(0)Xi.
Therefore, by (54) from Lemma 10, we have
|Y ′L−1
δ(0)Xi| ≤C1
p
(1 + s⋆)n log(p) + C1(s⋆−∥δ(0)∥0)
p
n log(p).
It follows that
Y ′L−1
δ(0)Xδ−δ(0)

2
2
σ4n
≤C1k(1 + s2
⋆) log(p),
for some constant C1. Therefore,
X
δ∈A(δ(0))
Π(δ|D)
Π(δ(0)|D) ≤pC1s(1+s2
⋆)
s−∥δ(0)∥0
X
k=0
p −∥δ(0)∥0
k
  1
pu
k
≤2pC1s(1+s2
⋆),
by choosing u > 2, assuming p ≥2. The last display, with (50) and (52) yield
Π(A|D) ≤2pC1s(1+s2
⋆) X
δ(0)∈P
Π(δ(0)|D)
Π(δ⋆|D)
≤2pC1s(1+s2
⋆)
s⋆−1
X
k=0
X
δ(0)∈P: ∥δ(0)∥0=s⋆−k
pku(1 + 2s)k exp


−
Y ′L−1
δ(0)Xδ⋆−δ(0)

2
2
2σ4(1 + kn)


.
As above, given i such that δ⋆i = 1, we write
Y ′L−1
δ(0)Xi = σV ′L−1
δ(0)Xi + θ⋆iX′
iL−1
δ(0)Xi +
X
k̸=i: δ⋆k=1
θ⋆kX′
kL−1
δ(0)Xi,
and using Lemma 10, we deduce that
|Y ′L−1
δ(0)Xi| ≥n|θ⋆i|
2
−C1
p
(1 + s⋆)n log(p) ≥n|θ⋆|
4
,

40
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
under the sample size condition n ≥C2(1 + s⋆) log(p)/θ2
⋆. Hence
Y ′L−1
δ(0)Xδ⋆−δ(0)

2
2
2σ4(1 + kn)
≥nθ2
⋆
64σ4 ,
so that
Π(A|D) ≤2pC1s(1+s2
⋆)e−nθ2⋆
64σ4
s⋆−1
X
k=0
s⋆
k

(1 + 2s)k
≤2pC1s(1+s2
⋆)e−nθ2⋆
64σ4
s⋆−1
X
k=0
(C1(1 + s⋆))k
≤2pC1s(1+s2
⋆)e−nθ2⋆
64σ4 (C1(1 + s⋆))s⋆
≤2 exp

−nθ2
⋆
64σ4 + C1(1 + s3
⋆) log(p)

≤exp

−nθ2
⋆
128σ4

≤1
p,
for n ≥C2θ−2
⋆(1 + s3
⋆) log(p), for some constant C2. This ends the proof.
□
Lemma 10. Assume H3, and ﬁx s > 0. There exist constants C1, C2 that depends
only on σ, κ, c0 and ∥θ⋆∥∞such that for n ≥C1s2 log(p), the following holds. For all
δ ∈∆s, and for all pair j̸ = k, such that δj = 0, it holds
|X′
jL−1
δ Xk| ≤C2

1 + ∥δ∥1/2
0
n
1{δk=1}
!
p
n log(p),
and
X′
jL−1
δ Xj ≥n
2 .
(54)
Proof. Applying the Woodbury identity to Lδ, we have
L−1
δ
= In −1
σ2 Xδ

I∥δ∥0 + 1
σ2 X′
δXδ
−1
X′
δ.
(55)
It follows that
X′
jL−1
δ Xk = ⟨Xj, Xk⟩−1
σ2 X′
jXδ

I∥δ∥0 + 1
σ2 X′
δXδ
−1
X′
δXk.
Under the sample size condition, by (30), we have

1
σ2 X′
jXδ

I∥δ∥0 + 1
σ2 X′
δXδ
−1
X′
δXk
 ≤2∥X′
δXj∥2∥X′
δXk∥2
σ2n
.
By assumption δj = 0. If δk = 0, then
∥X′
δXj∥2∥X′
δXk∥2 ≤
p
c0∥δ∥0n log(p)
p
c0∥δ∥0n log(p),

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
41
and we deduce that
|X′
jL−1
δ Xk| ≤
p
c0n log(p) + 2c0∥δ∥0 log(p)
σ2
≤C
p
n log(p),
provided that n ≥s2 log(p). Suppose now that δk = 1. Note that starting from (55)
we can also write
X′
δL−1
δ Xj =

I∥δ∥0 + 1
σ2 X′
δXδ
−1
X′
δXj.
This implies that if δk = 1, then
|X′
jL−1
δ Xk| ≤2∥X′
δXj∥2
n
≤2
p
c0∥δ∥0n log(p)
n
≤C2
r
∥δ∥0 log(p)
n
,
which establishes the ﬁrst part of (54). When j = k, we get
X′
jL−1
δ Xj ≥n −2c0∥δ∥0 log(p)
σ2
≥n
2 ,
under the sample size condition n ≥2c0s log(p)/σ2.
□
Lemma 11. Assume H3, and let E0 as in (31). There exist positive constant C1, C2
that depends only on c0, c2, and c (in the deﬁnition of E0) such that for n ≥C1s2
⋆log(p),
E⋆[1E0(Y )Π (∥δ∥0 > (1 + C2)s⋆| D)] ≤2
p.
Proof. The lemma follows from Theorem 2.2 of [3], applied with ¯ρ = 2
p
cn log(p)/σ,
and ¯κ = s⋆n. The sub-Gaussian assumption in H3-(1) implies that Equation (2.1)
of [3] holds with r0 = n/(2σ2 ¯ρ) under the sample size condition. Then using the
assumption in H3 that n/p and ∥θ⋆∥∞/ log(p) remain bounded from above by c2, we
checked that Equation 2.2 of [3] is satisﬁes for some absolute constant c0.
□
Appendix D. Description of the coupled chains for mixing time
estimation
We describe here the speciﬁc coupled Markov chain employed to estimate the mix-
ing time plots presented in Section 4.1. We describe the method for Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 2 proceeds similarly.
We start with a brief description of the method. Let {X(t), t ≥0} be the Markov
chain generated by Algorithm 1, where X(t) = (δ(t), θ(t)) ∈X. Let K denote the tran-
sition kernel of the Markov chain {X(t), t ≥0}. The basic idea of the method is to
construct a coupling ˇK of K with itself: that is, a transition kernel on X×X such that
ˇK((x, y), A×X) = K(x, A), ˇK((x, y), X×B) = K(y, B), for all x, y ∈X, and all mea-
surable sets A, B. The coupling ˇK is constructed in such a way that ˇK((x, x), D) = 1,

42
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
where D def
= {(x, x) : x ∈X}. The method then proceeds as follows. Fix a lag L ≥1.
Draw X(0) ∼Π(0), Y (0) ∼Π(0) (where Π(0) is the initial distribution as given in the
initialization step in Algorithm 1). Draw X(L)|(X(0), Y (0)) ∼KL(X(0), ·). Then for
any k ≥1, draw,
(X(L+k), Y (k))|
n
(X(L+k−1), Y (k−1)), . . . , (X(L), Y (0))
o
∼ˇK

(X(L+k−1), Y (k−1)), ·

.
Setting
τ (L) def
= inf
n
k > L : X(k) = Y (k−L)o
,
it then holds under some ergodicity assumptions on P (see [9]) that
∥Π(t) −Π∥tv ≤E
"
max

0,
&
τ (L) −L −t
L
'!#
,
(56)
where ⌈x⌉denote the smallest integer above x. The implication of (56) is that we
can empirically upper bound the left hand side of (56) by simulating multiple copies
of the joint chain as described above and then approximating the expectation on the
right hand side of (56) by Monte Carlo. We refer the reader to [9] for more details on
the construction of such coupled kernels.
We modify Algorithm 1 to construct the coupled kernel ˇP. Let (δ(1,t), θ(1,t)) and
let (δ(2,t), θ(2,t)) denote the states of the two chains at time t. At some iteration t ≥1,
given (δ(1,L+t), θ(1,L+t)) = (δ(1), θ(1)) and (δ(2,t), θ(2,t)) = (δ(2), θ(2)), we now describe
how to generate the next state of the coupled chain.
In step 1, to update δ(1) and δ(2), we ﬁrst make use of the same randomly drawn
subset J. For i = 1, 2, drawing ¯δ(i) ∼Q(J)
θ (δ(i), ·) is equivalent to let ¯δ(i)
−J = δ(i)
−J, and
for any j ∈J, draw ¯δ(i)
j
∼Ber(q(i)
j ) which we implement in the following way. We
ﬁrst draw a common uniform number uj ∼Uniform(0, 1), then we obtain ¯δ(i)
j
=
1{q(i)
j
≤uj} for i = 1, 2.
In step 2, to update θ(1) and θ(2), for simplicity, we partition the indices {1, . . . , p}
into four groups: Gab = {j : ¯δ(1)
j
= a, ¯δ(2)
j
= b} for a, b = 0, 1.
To update the components of θ(1)
G00 and θ(2)
G00, for any j ∈G00 we ﬁrst draw a common
standard normal random variables Zj, and then obtain ¯θ(i)
j
= ρ
−1
2
0
Zj for i = 1, 2.
To update the components of θ(1)
G01 and θ(2)
G01, Since in linear regression, [θ]δ | δ ∼
N(ˆθδ, Σ), where ˆθδ is describled in (33) and Σ = σ2(σ2ρ1I∥δ∥0)−1, we then have
θ(1) | δ(1) ∼N(ˆθ(1), Σ(1)) and θ(2) | δ(2) ∼N(ˆθ(2), Σ(2)), respectively. Then with the
property of gaussian random variables, we have θ(2)
G01 ∼N(ˆθ(2)
G01, Σ(2)
G01), where ˆθ(2)
G01
are the G01 components of ˆθ(2) and Σ(2)
G01 is the submatrix of Σ(2) with G01 rows and
columns. With θ(1)
G01 ∼N(0, ρ−1
0 I∥δG01∥0), we draw the maximal coupling of these two

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
43
gaussian distributions to update ¯θ(1)
G01 and ¯θ(2)
G01. A similar updating procedure is used
for the components of ¯θ(1)
G10 and ¯θ(2)
G10.
For components of θ(1)
G11 and θ(2)
G11, since we have θ(1)
G11 ∼N(ˆθ(1)
G11, Σ(1)
G11), where ˆθ(1)
G11
are the G11 components of ˆθ(1) and Σ(1)
G11 is the submatrix of Σ(1) with G11 rows and
columns, and similarly θ(2)
G11 ∼N(ˆθ(2)
G11, Σ(2)
G11), we could construct another maximal
coupling to update ¯θ(1)
G11 and ¯θ(2)
G11.
References
[1] Ahn, S., Korattikara, A. and Welling, M. (2012).
Bayesian posterior
sampling via stochastic gradient ﬁsher scoring. In Proceedings of the 29th Inter-
national Coference on International Conference on Machine Learning. ICML’12.
[2] Atchad´e, Y. (To appear).
Approximate spectral gaps for markov chains in
high-dimensions. SIAM Journal on Mathematics of Data Science .
[3] Atchade, Y. and Bhattacharyya, A. (2019).
An approach to large-scale
quasi-bayesian inference with spike-and-slab priors.
[4] Atchade, Y. A. (2017). On the contraction properties of some high-dimensional
quasi-posterior distributions. Ann. Statist. 45 2248–2273.
[5] Bardenet, R., Doucet, A. and Holmes, C. (2017). On markov chain monte
carlo methods for tall data. Journal of Machine Learning Research 18 1–43.
URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v18/15-205.html
[6] Bellec, G., Kappel, D., Maass, W. and Legenstein, R. (2018).
Deep
rewiring: Training very sparse deep networks. In International Conference on
Learning Representations.
[7] Bhadra, A., Datta, J., Li, Y. and Polson, N. (2020). Horseshoe regularisa-
tion for machine learning in complex and deep models1. International Statistical
Review 88 302–320.
[8] Biswas, N., Bhattacharya, A., Jacob, P. E. and Johndrow, J. E. (2021).
Coupled markov chain monte carlo for high-dimensional regression with half-t
priors.
[9] Biswas, N., Jacob, P. E. and Vanetti, P. (2019). Estimating convergence of
markov chains with l-lag couplings.
[10] Brooks, S., Gelman, A., Jones, G. and Meng, X.-L. (2011). Handbook of
Markov Chain Monte Carlo. CRC press.
[11] B¨uhlmann, P. and van de Geer, S. (2011). Statistics for high-dimensional
data. Springer Series in Statistics, Springer, Heidelberg. Methods, theory and
applications.

44
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
[12] Carlin, B. P. and Chib, S. (1995). Bayesian model choice via markov chain
monte carlo methods. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Method-
ological) 57 473–484.
[13] Carvalho, C. M., Polson, N. G. and Scott, J. G. (2010). The horseshoe
estimator for sparse signals. Biometrika 97 465–480.
[14] Castillo, I., Schmidt-Hieber, J. and van der Vaart, A. (2015). Bayesian
linear regression with sparse priors. Ann. Statist. 43 1986–2018.
[15] Castillo, I. and van der Vaart, A. (2012). Needles and straw in a haystack:
Posterior concentration for possibly sparse sequences. Ann. Statist. 40 2069–
2101.
[16] Ch´erief-Abdellatif, B.-E. (2020). Convergence rates of variational inference
in sparse deep learning.
In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
on Machine Learning (H. D. III and A. Singh, eds.), vol. 119 of Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research.
[17] Daskalakis, C., Dikkala, N. and Jayanti, S. (2018). Hogwild!-gibbs can be
panaccurate.
[18] Davis, C. and Kahan, W. M. (1970). The rotation of eigenvectors by a per-
turbation. iii. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis 7 1–46.
[19] De Sa, C., Olukotun, K. and R´e, C. (2016). Ensuring rapid mixing and
low bias for asynchronous gibbs sampling. In Proceedings of the 33rd Interna-
tional Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume
48. ICML’16.
[20] Dettmers, T. and Zettlemoyer, L. (2019). Sparse networks from scratch:
Faster training without losing performance. CoRR abs/1907.04840.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.04840
[21] Dubey, K. A., Reddi, S. J., Williamson, S. A., Poczos, B., Smola, A. J.
and Xing, E. P. (2016).
Variance reduction in stochastic gradient langevin
dynamics. In Advances in neural information processing systems.
[22] Fan, J. and Lv, J. (2008).
Sure independence screening for ultrahigh di-
mensional feature space.
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society:
Series B
(Statistical Methodology) 70 849–911.
URL https://rss.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1467-9868.2008.00674.x
[23] Fan, J., Samworth, R. and Wu, Y. (2009). Ultrahigh dimensional feature
selection: Beyond the linear model. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 10 2013–2038.
[24] Frankle, J. and Carbin, M. (2019).
The lottery ticket hypothesis: Find-
ing sparse, trainable neural networks. In International Conference on Learning
Representations.

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
45
[25] Gal, Y. and Ghahramani, Z. (2016). Dropout as a bayesian approximation:
Representing model uncertainty in deep learning. In Proceedings of The 33rd
International Conference on Machine Learning (M. F. Balcan and K. Q. Wein-
berger, eds.), vol. 48 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR.
[26] Gale, T., Elsen, E. and Hooker, S. (2019). The state of sparsity in deep
neural networks. ArXiv abs/1902.09574.
[27] George, E. I. and McCulloch, R. E. (1997). Approaches to bayesian variable
selection. Statist. Sinica 7 339–373.
[28] Ghosh, S., Yao, J. and Doshi-Velez, F. (2019). Model selection in bayesian
neural networks via horseshoe priors. Journal of Machine Learning Research 20
1–46.
[29] Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R. and Wainwright, M. (2015). Statistical Learning
with Sparsity: The Lasso and Generalizations. Chapman and Hall/CRC.
[30] Johndrow, J. E. and Mattingly, J. C. (2018). Error bounds for approxima-
tions of markov chains used in bayesian sampling.
[31] Johnson, M. J., Saunderson, J. and Willsky, A. S. (2013).
Analyzing
hogwild parallel gaussian gibbs sampling. In Proceedings of the 26th International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems - Volume 2. NIPS’13.
[32] Kingma, D. P. and Welling, M. (2014). Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. In
2nd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014, Banﬀ,
AB, Canada, April 14-16, 2014, Conference Track Proceedings.
[33] LeCun, Y., Cortes, C. and Burges, C. (2010).
Mnist handwritten digit
database. ATT Labs [Online]. Available: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist 2.
[34] Lee, N., Ajanthan, T. and Torr, P. (2019). SNIP: SINGLE-SHOT NET-
WORK PRUNING BASED ON CONNECTION SENSITIVITY. In Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations.
[35] Li, C., Chen, C., Carlson, D. and Carin, L. (2016). Preconditioned sto-
chastic gradient langevin dynamics for deep neural networks. In Proceedings of
the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence. AAAI’16, AAAI Press.
[36] Lindvall, T. (1992). Lectures on the coupling method. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
New York.
[37] Louizos, C., Ullrich, K. and Welling, M. (2017). Bayesian compression
for deep learning. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems. NIPS’17.
[38] Louizos, C., Welling, M. and Kingma, D. P. (2018). Learning sparse neural
networks through l0 regularization.
In International Conference on Learning
Representations.

46
YVES ATCHAD´E AND LIWEI WANG
[39] Lounici, K. (2008). Sup-norm convergence rate and sign concentration property
of Lasso and Dantzig estimators. Electronic Journal of Statistics 2 90 – 102.
[40] Ma, Y.-A., Chen, T. and Fox, E. B. (2015). A complete recipe for stochastic
gradient mcmc. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems - Volume 2. NIPS’15, MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA, USA.
[41] Meinshausen, N. and Yu, B. (2009). Lasso-type recovery of sparse represen-
tations for high-dimensional data. Ann. Statist. 37 246–270.
[42] Meyn, S. and Tweedie, R. L. (2009). Markov chains and stochastic stability.
2nd ed. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
[43] Mitchell, T. J. and Beauchamp, J. J. (1988). Bayesian variable selection in
linear regression. Journal of the american statistical association 83 1023–1032.
[44] Negahban, S. N., Ravikumar, P., Wainwright, M. J. and Yu, B. (2012).
A uniﬁed framework for high-dimensional analysis of m-estimators with decom-
posable regularizers. Statistical Science 27 538–557.
[45] Piironen, J. and Vehtari, A. (2017). Sparsity information and regularization
in the horseshoe and other shrinkage priors. Electronic Journal of Statistics 11
5018 – 5051.
[46] Pillai, N. S. and Smith, A. (2015). Ergodicity of approximate mcmc chains
with applications to large data sets.
[47] Robert, C. P. and Casella, G. (2004). Monte Carlo statistical methods. 2nd
ed. Springer Texts in Statistics, Springer-Verlag, New York.
[48] Roberts, G. and Tweedie, R. (1996). Exponential convergence of langevin
distributions and their discrete approximations. Bernoulli 2 341–363.
[49] Rudolf, D. and Schweizer, N. (2018). Perturbation theory for Markov chains
via Wasserstein distance. Bernoulli 24 2610 – 2639.
[50] Smola, A. and Narayanamurthy, S. (2010). An architecture for parallel topic
models. Proc. VLDB Endow. 3 703–710.
[51] Tran, M.-N., Nguyen, N., Nott, D. and Kohn, R. (2020). Bayesian deep net
glm and glmm. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics 29 97–113.
[52] Wainwright, M. J. (2019). High-Dimensional Statistics: A Non-Asymptotic
Viewpoint. Cambridge Series in Statistical and Probabilistic Mathematics, Cam-
bridge University Press.
[53] Wang, Y. and Blei, D. M. (2019). Frequentist consistency of variational bayes.
Journal of the American Statistical Association 114 1147–1161.
[54] Welling, M. and Teh, Y. W. (2011). Bayesian learning via stochastic gradi-
ent langevin dynamics. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on

ASYNCHRONOUS MCMC SAMPLING FOR SPARSE BAYESIAN INFERENCE
47
International Conference on Machine Learning. ICML’11, Omnipress, USA.
[55] Wen, W., Wu, C., Wang, Y., Chen, Y. and Li, H. (2016). Learning struc-
tured sparsity in deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the 30th International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. NIPS’16.
[56] Xiao, H., Rasul, K. and Vollgraf, R. (2017).
Fashion-mnist:
a novel
image dataset for benchmarking machine learning algorithms.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1708.07747 .
[57] Yang, Y., Pati, D. and Bhattacharya, A. (2020). α-variational inference
with statistical guarantees. The Annals of Statistics 48 886 – 905.
[58] Yang, Y., Wainwright, M. J. and Jordan, M. I. (2016). On the computa-
tional complexity of high-dimensional bayesian variable selection. Ann. Statist.
44 2497–2532.
[59] Zhang, A., Lipton, Z. C., Li, M. and Smola, A. J. (2019). Dive into Deep
Learning. http://www.d2l.ai.
[60] Zhang, F. and Gao, C. (2020).
Convergence rates of variational posterior
distributions. The Annals of Statistics 48 2180 – 2207.
