---
title: "Twelve Years of Galaxy Zoo"
authors: "Karen L. Masters, the Galaxy Zoo Team"
year: 2019
source: arxiv
source_id: "1910.08177"
url: "http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.08177v1"
domain: astrophysics
---
Galactic Dynamics in the Era of Large Surveys
Proceedings IAU Symposium No. 353, 2019
M. Valluri, & J. A. Sellwood
c⃝2019 International Astronomical Union
DOI: 00.0000/X000000000000000X
Twelve Years of Galaxy Zoo
Karen L. Masters1 and Galaxy Zoo Team
1Haverford College, Department of Physics and Astronomy, 370 Lancaster Avenue, Haverford,
PA 19041, USA
email: klmasters@haverford.edu
Abstract. The Galaxy Zoo project has provided quantitative visual morphologies for over a
million galaxies, and has been part of a reinvigoration of interest in the morphologies of galaxies
and what they reveal about galaxy evolution. Morphological information collected by GZ has
shown itself to be a powerful tool for studying galaxy evolution, and GZ continues to collect
classiﬁcations - currently serving imaging from DECaLS in its main site, and running a variety
of related projects hosted by the Zooniverse; the citizen science platform which came out of the
early success of GZ. I highlight some of the results from the last twelve years, with a particular
emphasis on linking morphology and dynamics, look forward to future projects in the GZ family,
and provide a quick start guide for how you can easily make use of citizen science techniques to
analysis your own large and complex data sets.
Keywords. galaxies:fundamental parameters, galaxies:kinematics and dynamics, galaxies:evolution,
galaxies:statistics, catalogs
1. Introduction
It has been more than twelve years since the launch of Galaxy Zoo (on 11th July 2007)†,
and the project has been continuously active during that period, inviting volunteers
to help provide galaxy classiﬁcations, using images from a variety of diﬀerent sources
(see Table 1); and with the science team making use of the aggregated and reduced
classiﬁcations to investigate a wide range of topics in extragalactic astrophysics.
This invited talk for the IAU Symposium, “Galactic Dynamics in the Era of Large
Surveys” was to cover “Key Results from Galaxy Zoo”. As well as providing a brief
overview of twelve years of the project, I will focus on results (given the topic of the
conference) most linked to disc galaxy dynamics and the structures this creates, and also
look to the future plans for Galaxy Zoo and the Galaxy Zoo method.
2. The Galaxy Zoo Method
Galaxy Zoo was inspired by the 1 million galaxy sample of the original Sloan Digital
Sky Survey (SDSS; namely the Main Galaxy Sample of Strauss et al.(2002), which was
fully released in Data Release 7, Abazajian et al.(2009)). This was the original data
set, and the original Galaxy Zoo (Lintott et al.(2008)) asked for simple classiﬁcation into
spiral or not; further asking spirals to be identiﬁed as “S” or “Z” shaped (to test claims of
a preferred sense of rotation; Land et al.(2008)), or edge-on/can’t tell, and had categories
for merging systems (and artefacts). This sample was classiﬁed with a median of 40 people
per image in about eighteen months of operations, and the aggregated classiﬁcations were
released in Lintott et al.(2011).
Following the success of the ﬁrst phase, Galaxy Zoo 2, (GZ2) was launched, asking
for more detailed classiﬁcations for the brightest (r < 16) 250,000 of the SDSS sample.
† www.galaxyzoo.org
1
arXiv:1910.08177v1  [astro-ph.GA]  17 Oct 2019

2
Karen L. Masters
Figure 1 shows an example set of responses for galaxy NGC 2771 from GZ2‡. The GZ2
classiﬁcations were reduced and released in Willett et al.(2013); an improved treatment
of redshift bias on the spiral arm questions is presented in Hart et al.(2016), and these
improved classiﬁcations are now also available.
Following the completion of classiﬁcations on the original SDSS imaging, Galaxy Zoo
relaunched with all public images from optical Hubble Space Telescope surveys (COS-
MOS, GOODS, etc; these classiﬁcations were published in Willett et al.(2017)), as well as
the images from the CANDELS survey (classiﬁcations available in Simmons et al.(2017)).
Other survey images for which Galaxy Zoo have obtained classiﬁcations include UKIDSS
and KiDS; these are not yet published. We have also shown images generated by the
Illustris simulation (see Dickinson et al.(2018)), with the goal of testing how well such
large scale simulations do at reproducing the population demographics of galaxy mor-
phology. Currently live on the site are images from the Dark Energy Camera Legacy
Survey (DECaLS; also see Section 7).
3. Summary of Published Results
The Galaxy Zoo science team have published over 60 papers in the last 12 years which
make use of the classiﬁcations from diﬀerent phases of GZ† At the time of writing there
are twelve papers from the team with more than 100 citations each.
Attempting to categorize publications into types, GZ team papers can be broken down
into:
• Data papers which describe the techniques to go from clicks to classiﬁcations (in-
cluding user weighting, and accounting for image quality, and changes in how galaxies
appear in images as a function of redshift). These are: Lintott et al.(2011), Willett et
‡ See www.visualise.galaxyzoo.org for more examples
† A complete listing of team papers can be found at
www.zooniverse.org/about/publications.
Figure 1. An example classiﬁcation from Galaxy Zoo 2 in the format which is available
at www.visualise.galaxyzoo.org. This galaxy is NGC 2771, which has a classiﬁcation of
(R’)SB(r)ab in the RC3 (de Vaucouleurs et al.(1991)). The numbers in the orange bar at top
represent the number of users (after a weighting scheme is applied which removes users who
always provide highly inconsistent answers) who responded positively to the question indicated.

Galaxy Zoo
3
Table 1. Summary of Data Sets and Projects in the Galaxy Zoo Project
Project
Size
Imaging Source/
Data Access
Reference
(approx)
Classiﬁcation Type
Original Galaxy Zoo
1 million
SDSS Main Galaxy Sample
Public1,2
Lintott et al.(2011)
(spiral/early-type/mergers only)
Galaxy Zoo 2
250,000
SDSS Main Galaxy Sample r < 17.
Public1,2
Willett et al.(2013)
Full classiﬁcation tree.
Hart et al.(2016)
Galaxy Zoo: Hubble
120,000
Public Optical HST Surveys
Public1
Willett et al.(2017)
(COSMOS, GOODS etc)
Galaxy Zoo: CANDELS
48,000
CANDELS Survey Galaxies
Public1
Simmons et al.(2017)
Galaxy Zoo: MaNGA
30,000
MaNGA Target Sample
Public1,2
Aguado et al.(2019)
GZ2 style
(SDSS DR15)
Galaxy Zoo 4
SDSS Extra Imaging (DR12) r < 17
Pending
Galaxy Zoo: UKIDSS
UKIDSS
Pending
Galaxy Zoo: Illustris
Illustris Simulated Galaxies
Pending
Dickinson et al.(2018)
Galaxy Zoo: KiDS
GAMA KiDS
Pending
Holwerda et al.(2019)
Notes:
1Public data is available at www.data.galaxyzoo.org
2Also available via SDSS Casjobs at www.skyserver.org
al.(2013), Willett et al.(2017), Simmons et al.(2017). In these papers you can also ﬁnd
comparisons of Galaxy Zoo morphologies with other published classiﬁcations and mor-
phological proxies (e.g. structural parameters).
• Papers which look at broad statistical properties of the morphologies of galaxies.
These have often focused on the comparison of colour and morphology (see Section 4).
Examples include: Bamford et al.(2009), Skibba et al.(2009), Schawinski et al.(2009),
Masters et al.(2010), Schawinski et al.(2014), Smethurst et al.(2015), Hart et al.(2016),
Masters et al.(2019).
• Papers about interesting/odd objects (or classes of objects) revealed by Galaxy Zoo.
Examples include the green peas (compact ionized galaxies, see Cardamone et al.(2009))
and Hanny’s Voorwerp (a light echo from a recently quiescent accreting black hole; see
Lintott et al.(2009) and recent work by Keel et al.(2019)).
• Papers which investigate the morphology of speciﬁc types of galaxy, or the properties
of galaxies with speciﬁc morphological features. Examples include work on the host galax-
ies of Active Galactic Nuclei (AGN): Schawinski et al.(2010), Simmons et al.(2013), Gal-
loway et al.(2015), Smethurst et al.(2016); mergers: Darg et al.(2010), Darg et al.(2010)
or many papers on the properties of disc galaxies with bars: Masters et al.(2011), Mas-
ters et al.(2012), Cheung et al.(2013), Melvin et al.(2014), Simmons et al.(2014), Kruk
et al.(2018). Section 5 will discuss our work on bars in more detail.
In addition to team papers, the public release of classiﬁcations has led to many more
results making use of GZ classiﬁcations. Overall, at the time of writing† the classiﬁcations
have been used or mentioned in over 1000 papers in the last 12 years. Figure 2 shows
how this has grown since 2009 (note that 2019 data is not yet complete).
4. Colour and Morphology
One of the earliest contributions to come out of GZ classiﬁcations, was putting on a
ﬁrm statistical footing the correlation between galaxy colour and morphology. While it
† Based on a literature search of the phrase ”Galaxy Zoo”

4
Karen L. Masters
had been known for a long time (e.g. as commented by Zwicky et al.(1955)) that spiral
galaxies were bluer than elliptical galaxies, it was the advent of large galaxy surveys
(most notably SDSS) that let to the common perception that colour and morphology were
entirely equivalent. Although this result was based on fairly small samples of galaxies
with morphological classiﬁcations, it remains fairly common in the astronomical literature
today.
In a pair of early papers, GZ classiﬁcations were used to look at the correlation between
colour in morphology in a larger sample than ever before (Skibba et al.(2009), Bamford
et al.(2009)). These papers revealed the existence of signiﬁcant numbers of red spirals
and blue ellipticals which were investigated in Masters et al.(2010) and Schawinski et
al.(2010) respectively. Red spirals in particular were found to be quite common, with
more than half of the most massive spirals being optically red (even when removing
highly inclined spirals, and very early-type spirals with large bulges). Example images
of red and blue spirals are shown in Figure 3. This demonstrated that it is important to
recognise that selections based on colour cannot be interpreted as cleanly dividing the
population into the two broad morphological types.
The imperfect correlation between colour and morphology makes sense physically. The
morphology of a galaxy (to “ﬁrst order”, ignoring things like dust) provides information
on the orbits of stars within it. As such, is should be obvious that important clues to
the formation history of galaxies is revealed by their morphologies, and this informa-
tion is complimentary, but not identical to, their star formation history and chemical
composition as revealed by photometry (i.e. colour) and spectra.
5. Bars and Spiral Arms
The more detailed classiﬁcations of GZ2 enabled the study of features in disc galaxies
tied intimately to their dynamics, such as bars, and spirals.
5.1. Bars
The GZ team have also published a wide range of papers investigating bars in galaxies.
Early results on bars revealed something unexpected at the time, that they were more
Figure 2. Count of papers (refereed in blue, non-refereed in green) mentioning the term ”Galaxy
Zoo” over the last twelve years, since Galaxy Zoo launched in 2007. Credit: NASA/SAO Astro-
physics Data System; ADS

Galaxy Zoo
5
common in redder spirals (Masters et al.(2011)). Work to compare what kinds of bars
are identiﬁed by GZ classiﬁcations (with a threshold of pbar > 0.5) demonstrated they
were strong bars (SB in the traditional notation, but not SAB); while weaker bars can
be identiﬁed by lower vote fractions this is at the risk of including larger numbers of
erroneous classiﬁcations; see e.g. Willett et al.(2013)). Example images of a red barred
spiral and a blue unbarred spiral are shown in Figure 3. Further work has conﬁrmed a
picture of strong bars being preferentially associated with massive, red, gas poor (Masters
et al.(2012)) and low star forming (Cheung et al.(2013)) discs, and in addition showing
evidence for secular growth of pseudo-bulges (Cheung et al.(2015)). Classiﬁcations on
the public HST images, and CANDELS allowed investigation of bar fractions to be ex-
tended to higher redshift revealing how they become more common in the later Universe
(Melvin et al.(2014), Simmons et al.(2014)). The clustering of GZ2 barred galaxies was
investigated in Skibba et al.(2012), while Galloway et al.(2015) studied the impact galac-
tic scale bars had on AGN properties, and Kruk et al.(2017), Kruk et al.(2018) revealed
the presence of oﬀset bars, and provided three component (bar, bulge, disc) photometric
ﬁts for a large sample from GZ2.
5.2. Spiral Arms
Spiral arms (the number and winding angle) are also described in GZ2 classiﬁcations.
The properties of spiral arms in the population has been investigated in a series of
recent papers. Hart et al.(2016), Hart et al.(2017a) provided an updated method to
correct classiﬁcations for redshift bias, and showed that many arm spirals are associated
with recent star-formation, and also that the distribution of SF diﬀers between two-
armed (“grand design”) and many armed (“ﬂocculent”) spirals. The winding properties
identiﬁed in GZ2 were then used to investigate spiral formation mechanisms; interestingly
we ﬁnd that the classic static density wave does not match GZ2 classiﬁcations on a
population scale – they reveal a lack of strong correlation between bulge size and spiral
arm pitch angle predicted by those models (Hart et al.(2017bs), Hart et al.(2018), Masters
et al.(2019)) . Further work on this topic may reveal many interesting further constraints
on spiral arm formation mechanisms.
Figure 3. Example images of red (left) and blue (right) spiral galaxies identiﬁed in Galaxy
Zoo. These also demonstrate the barred/not barred selection from GZ2.

6
Karen L. Masters
6. Spin OﬀProjects
The GZ technique of crowdsourcing the analysis of galaxy images can also be applied
to more than just answering simple questions. New capabilities in The Zooniverse Project
Builder (see Section 8) make this very straightforward now, but even before this existed
there were eﬀorts to make spin-oﬀprojects linked to GZ by science team members. Spin-
oﬀGalaxy Zoo projects run by the science team in part, or whole include:
• Galaxy Zoo Mergers - a custom built project in which volunteers were asked to run
models of galaxy mergers and ﬁnd the best match to images. (Holincheck et al.(2016))
• Galaxy Zoo Bar Lengths - this project ran in a Google interface to Galaxy Zoo and
measured bar lengths on SDSS images. For details see Hoyle et al.(2011). A second Galaxy
Zoo Bar Lengths was run more recently† to do expand on this work using Hubble images;
results will be presented in Hutchinson-Smith et al. in prep.
• Galaxy Zoo: 3D - this spinoﬀuses Project Builder to display images of galaxies which
are part of the SDSS-IV project, Mapping Nearby Galaxies at Apache Point Observatory
(MaNGA; Bundy et al.(2015)), and is asking users to draw the locations of bars, spiral
arms and foreground stars (as well as mark the centers of the galaxies)‡. The resulting
masks can be used with MaNGA data to extract spectra from the respective features
(e.g. as used by Peterken et al.(2019), Fraser-McKelvie et al.(2019)). The project will be
described in full in an upcoming Masters et al. in prep.
• Galaxy Builder - Another challenge for extragalactic astrophysicists is decomposing
galaxy images into multiple components. While large databases exist of simple automated
ﬁts, signiﬁcant human interaction is generally still required to ensure physical results. An
attempt to involve crowdsourcing in this process is Galaxy Builder¶, which makes use of
crowdsourced galaxy models to select the number of needed componnts (from disc, bulge,
bar, and any number of spirals) and then initiate a ﬁnal automated ﬁt. This project will
be described in full in an upcoming Lingard et al. in prep.. and is a custom project built
inside the Project Builder framework.
• Clump Scout - very recently launched∥this project is asking volunteers to help
identify star formation clumps in galaxies.
7. The Future of Galaxy Zoo - Machines and Humans Working
Together
For Galaxy Zoo itself, the next generation of sky surveys, moving to both deeper
and higher resolution will challenge the volume of galaxies which are classiﬁable by the
crowd. Luckily machine learning algorithms are also advancing. An initial study by Beck
et al.(2018) demonstrated the use of a random forest algorithm to signiﬁcantly speed
up the ﬁrst (binary) step on the question tree. Today, the main GZ site is running a
new “Enhanced Workﬂow”, which uses a Bayesian model to prioritze the galaxies shown
to volunteers. A Bayesian Convolutional Neural Network trains on the crowdsources
classifcations at the end of each week, and quickly becomes expert at classifying the
simplest galaxies, while identifying more complex galaxy which need to be shown to the
human volunteers for further classiﬁcation. For more details on this see Walmsley et
al.(2019).
† https://www.zooniverse.org/projects/vrooje/galaxy-zoo-bar-lengths
‡ https://www.zooniverse.org/projects/klmasters/galaxy-zoo-3d
¶ https://www.zooniverse.org/projects/tingard/galaxy-builder
∥https://www.zooniverse.org/projects/hughdickinson/galaxy-zoo-clump-scout

Galaxy Zoo
7
8. How to Build Your Own Zooniverse Project
The early success of Galaxy Zoo as a public engagement project (at its peak obtaining
70,000 classiﬁcations an hour; and noted by The Guardian in 2012†† as providing “no
surer way to engage the public than to involve people in the research itself”) inspired
the creation of The Zooniverse‡‡, a platform which hosts similar citizen science projects
across any research topic. The Zooniverse launched in 2010 to make a common community
of citizen scientists, and now has over 1.7 million account holders. In the early days
each project was custom built by the development team, which limited the rate at which
projects could launch. A signiﬁcant innovation came with the launch of Project Builder¶¶
in 2015. This facility allows researcher to build their own projects, which can be submitted
to The Zooniverse for peer review and beta testing if they wish to be promoted to the
millions of account holders, or simply run independently. A simple project based on a few
images can be built in a matter of minutes, entirely in the browser, and facilties exist to
provide several diﬀerent types of common crowdsourcing activities (e.g. question trees,
drawing, annotation). A total of just over 200 projects have been formally launched by
The Zooniverse, out of more than 9000 which have been built on Project Builder (300 of
which have independently collected more than 100 classiﬁcations).
Zooniverse Project Builder projects don’t have to be public facing. One example of
use within astronomy was for the visual inspection of spectra obtained for the MaNGA
Spectral Library (Yan et al.(2019)), where 28 members of the MaNGA science team
helped to visually inspect the quality of 10,797 stellar spectra.
9. Summary and Conclusions
In this short paper, based on an invited review talk given at the “Galactic Dynamics in
the Era of Large Surveys” conference in Shanghai, China in July 2019 I give a whistle-stop
tour through the ﬁrst twelve years of the Galaxy Zoo project, hi-lighting in particular
results related to the imperfect correlation between galaxy colour and morphology, as
well as results related to the disc galaxy dynamical structures: galactic bars and spirals.
Almost a teenager now, Galaxy Zoo is a mature technique, which has had a signiﬁcant
impact on the ﬁeld of extragalactic astrophysics. New innovations in both crowdsourcing,
and the combination of humans and computers working together ensure that the project
is still relevant and productive today, has a long future to come.
References
Abazajian, K. N., Adelman-McCarthy, J. K., Ag¨ueros, M. A., et al. 2009, ApJS, 182, 543
Aguado, D. S., Ahumada, R., Almeida, A., et al. 2019, ApJS, 240, 23
Bamford, S. P., Nichol, R. C., Baldry, I. K., et al. 2009, MNRAS, 393, 1324
Beck, M. R., Scarlata, C., Fortson, L. F., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 476, 5516
Bundy, K., Bershady, M. A., Law, D. R., et al. 2015, ApJ, 798, 7
Cardamone, C., Schawinski, K., Sarzi, M., et al. 2009, MNRAS, 399, 1191
Cheung, E., Athanassoula, E., Masters, K. L., et al. 2013, AJ, 779, 162
Cheung, E., Trump, J. R., Athanassoula, E., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 447, 506
Darg, D. W., Kaviraj, S., Lintott, C. J., et al. 2010, MNRAS, 401, 1552
Darg, D. W., Kaviraj, S., Lintott, C. J., et al. 2010, MNRAS, 401, 1043
Dickinson, H., Fortson, L., Lintott, C., et al. 2018, The Astrophysical Journal, 853, 194
†† http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/2012/mar/18/galaxy-zoo-crowdsourcing-citizen-scientists
‡‡ www.zooniverse.org
¶¶ https://www.zooniverse.org/lab

8
Karen L. Masters
Fraser-McKelvie, A., Merriﬁeld, M., Arag´on-Salamanca, A., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 488, L6
Galloway, M. A., Willett, K. W., Fortson, L. F., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 448, 3442
Hart, R. E., Bamford, S. P., Willett, K. W., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 461, 3663
Hart, R. E., Bamford, S. P., Casteels, K. R. V., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 468, 1850
Hart, R. E., Bamford, S. P., Hayes, W. B., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 472, 2263
Hart, R. E., Bamford, S. P., Keel, W. C., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 478, 932
Holincheck, A. J., Wallin, J. F., Borne, K., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 459, 720
Holwerda, B. W., Kelvin, L., Baldry, I., et al. 2019, AJ, 158, 103
Hoyle, B., Masters, K. L., Nichol, R. C., et al. 2011, MNRAS, 415, 3627
Keel, W. C., Bennert, V. N., Pancoast, A., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 483, 4847
Kruk, S. J., Lintott, C. J., Bamford, S. P., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 473, 4731
Kruk, S. J., Lintott, C. J., Simmons, B. D., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 469, 3363
Lintott, C. J., Schawinski, K., Slosar, A., et al. 2008, MNRAS, 389, 1179
Lintott, C. J., Schawinski, K., Keel, W., et al. 2009, MNRAS, 399, 129
Lintott, C., Schawinski, K., Bamford, S., et al. 2011, MNRAS, 410, 166
Land, K., Slosar, A., Lintott, C., et al. 2008, MNRAS, 388, 1686
Masters, K. L., Mosleh, M., Romer, A. K., et al. 2010, MNRAS, 405, 783
Masters, K. L., Nichol, R. C., Hoyle, B., et al. 2011, MNRAS, 411, 2026
Masters, K. L., Nichol, R. C., Haynes, M. P., et al. 2012, MNRAS, 424, 2180
Masters, K. L., Lintott, C. J., Hart, R. E., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 487, 1808
Melvin, T., Masters, K., Lintott, C., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 438, 2882
Peterken, T., Fraser-McKelvie, A., Arag´on-Salamanca, A., et al. 2019, MNRAS 2135
Schawinski, K., Lintott, C., Thomas, D., et al. 2009, MNRAS, 396, 818
Schawinski, K., Urry, C. M., Virani, S., et al. 2010, AJ, 711, 284
Schawinski, K., Urry, C. M., Simmons, B. D., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 440, 889
Simmons, B. D., Lintott, C., Schawinski, K., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 429, 2199
Simmons, B. D., Melvin, T., Lintott, C., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 445, 3466
Simmons, B. D., Lintott, C., Willett, K. W., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 464, 4420
Skibba, R. A., Bamford, S. P., Nichol, R. C., et al. 2009, MNRAS, 399, 966
Skibba, R. A., Masters, K. L., Nichol, R. C., et al. 2012, MNRAS, 423, 1485
Smethurst, R. J., Lintott, C. J., Simmons, B. D., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 450, 435
Smethurst, R. J., Lintott, C. J., Simmons, B. D., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 463, 2986
Strauss, M. A., Weinberg, D. H., Lupton, R. H., et al. 2002, AJ, 124, 1810
de Vaucouleurs, G., de Vaucouleurs, A., Corwin, H. G., et al. 1991, Third Reference Catalogue
of Bright Galaxies (RC3).
Walmsley, M., Smith, L., Lintott, C., et al. 2019, MNRAS submitted; arXiv:1905.07424
Willett, K. W., Lintott, C. J., Bamford, S. P., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 435, 2835
Willett, K. W., Galloway, M. A., Bamford, S. P., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 464, 4176
Yan, R., Chen, Y., Lazarz, D., et al. 2019, ApJ submitted, arXiv:1812.02745
Zwicky, F., Gates, H. S., & Taylor, D. 1955, Report to Oﬃce of Naval Research, 1, 1
